Catharsis

Prologue

What happens to the soul when the body dies?  What is it that lurks just beyond the veil of agonizing death, patiently waiting for the reliable beat of the heart to come to a halt?  To know the answer is to find out whether or not you pray to an empty, heartless sky each night.  When your eyes shut out this cold and indifferent world for the last time, what is it you will see?  Wouldn’t you love to know what secrets are whispered when that final precious breath escapes your lips?  Guess what?  I know.



Part I 

Unfamiliar and panicked voices filled my cloudy, disoriented mind.  Amidst the painful ringing in my ears I could occasionally hear bits and phrases of the conversation emerging from a distant, dormant portion of my mind like a dream, “…patient is going into hypovolemic shock…blood pressure falling...gotta move or we’ll lose this guy.” The words sounded hollow and far off, as if I was underwater.  Forcing my eyelids open, I gazed up into a blinding yellow light and five unfamiliar faces that stared down at me wide-eyed and frenzied from behind white surgeon’s masks.  I tried to say something but only slurred gibberish emerged.  
A scalpel was procured from somewhere and guided into my body by steady, latex-covered hands.  
I felt the warmth within me escape as the incision expanded from just above my heart down into my abdomen.  The sensation felt numbed and tingly.  I squirmed slightly and in an instant a pair of arms emerged to restrain my body.  I tried to protest but no sound escaped my lips.   My vision began to blur and waver uncontrollably, and I found myself gasping for air.  I caught a fading glimpse of the EKG, pulsating and beeping intermittently.  Soon nothing could be discerned, but the voices grew steadily louder, accompanied by a slow rhythmic pounding.
“…vessels are dilating, heart beat irregular.  Body temperature is falling fast. Patient is experiencing pulmonary edema, loss of consciousness.  Get this guy on aprotinin!  Somebody help me hold him down.”  Soon even the voices began to dissipate, and the pounding in my head grew slower and slower.  I was left with my own thoughts which floated aimlessly, occasionally colliding with each other to form something slightly more tangible.
It’s so cold.  What’s happening to me?   I wish my head would stop pounding.  The beating stopped, and somewhere a shout rang out.  Darkness crept in like a fog to the corners of my vision.  No longer able to see or hear, I could now only feel the masked figures as they shuffled around the emergency room in a chaotic fury, desperately searching for some method of restoring the body before them back to life. The air around me was infused with a ghostly chill, and all of the sudden I felt an impending feeling of doom sink into the core of my being.  I want to die.  I need to die.
I stared up into the operating lamp overhead and squinted at the intense rays that returned my gaze.  The turmoil of the operating room faded away as an eerie stillness passed over me.  



Consciousness slowly returned, and I was awakened to a blanket of whiteness, blinding like a snowstorm.  Any semblance of depth or space or proximity had vanished along with the operating room.  The only object distinguishable among the whiteness was an unremarkable steel gurney on which a figure lay, covered by a thin white sheet.  Two pale, cyanotic feet poked out from underneath the sheet, and from one of the toes hung a small tag.  I swallowed hard at the fear of a reality I could not understand and a course of action I feared to embark upon.  My instincts urged me to run, but where could I go when I was enveloped in absence?  Slowly I inched toward the gurney until I was within inches of the figure underneath the sheet.  There was no stench, no sound, no clue.  I reached an unsteady hand to clutch the edges of the sheet and yanked hard. 
As the sheet slid away and the body was revealed, a flood of memories arose within me staring into the eyes of the man on the gurney.  Those eyes...At their sight I could not suppress my past; it clung to my attention like a stain. 


On the outskirts of town by the railroad tracks there is an old, run-down granary that still stands.  Every once and awhile you might find some high school kids sneaking in to drink beer or scare their girlfriends, but for the most part no one comes near the decrepit structure.  With no one to keep an eye on things, we used to come and go as we pleased.  The spot was perfect.  The coke was packaged and stored in the grain silos, hidden by pounds of wheat and barley that not only disguised our shipment, but also threw off the scent.  The shipments were transported in old farm trucks driven by unsuspecting redneck ranchers who couldn’t figure out why they were being paid such good money for hauling wheat and barley.  Everything was smooth as butter for a while…the money came in, we were happy, and everything stayed hush-hush, till one night some two-bit rent-a-cop showed up poking his nose around where it didn’t belong. I don’t know how he found us; maybe he spotted the truck idling out back, maybe someone tipped him off, you never know.  
Catastrophe.  You gotta wonder how it all begins.  How something so obviously wrong can pull you so deep into its clutches.  It starts out as instinct, I suppose, driven by innate, unconscious desire.  There is a chain reaction as disaster compounds disaster.  There is a brief moment in all the mess in which you realize that you are not in control of your life, and that you must ride the wake of your disturbance all the way into shore or perish.
We were up on the grain elevator when it all went down.  I was watching the small hand of my watch travel persistently around the face.  1:30 A.M.  They were late.  They were never late.  
“I got a bad feeling about this one Rogelio,” I said to my partner.
“Relax, Mike,” Rogelio urged.  “No one ever comes around here.  Course there was that time I caught those two kids sexin’ in the hayloft.”
No sooner had these words escaped his lips then moonlight pierced the silence of the night, revealing through the open door a solitary shadow.   Fidgeting nervously in the darkness, fingers tapping away at the holster of a handgun, his fear was evident. 
Motions slowed to a snail’s pace to accentuate the silence.  Beside me, thumb easing back the trigger of his own weapon, my partner Rogelio stood poised for the first sign of trouble.  I quietly withdrew the Colt from my belt and rested it on my knee, staring the officer down through the prongs of the scope.  A signal from my partner indicated his intentions, and as he crouched on all fours and negotiated the hayloft rafters, I waited impatiently, trying to contain the adrenaline that coursed through my veins.  I kept a ready finger on the trigger as I listened to my partner shuffle along the rotting planks.  Suddenly there was a loud groan and a snap as one of the planks gave way beneath.  
Startled, the guard tensed up and pointed his gun blindly in the general vicinity of the clamor, his arm shaking erratically.  Reacting without thinking, I squeezed the trigger.  Two shots rang out, one from my own gun and one from Rogelio’s.  The first shot pierced through the man’s kneecap, burying itself somewhere in the bone and sending him tumbling in agony to the ground. Rogelio’s bullet shot into the man’s forearm and exited out the back, causing the him to drop his gun and fold over in anguish.  With reckless abandon my partner swung down from his hiding place on a rusty old steel pulley and within seconds he was on top of the guard.  I slid down the grain elevator, seconds behind, and stood above the two, breathing heavily.
When a bullet enters the skin, it doesn’t look like much.  A small hole, a little blood.  The skin around the entrance wound is black and crusty from the powder burn.  However, once the bullet collides with a structure within the arm, a bone, a ligament, a muscle, it begins to tumble, sending forth a pressure wave of metal shards and explosive gas which erupts unpredictably through the body.  By the time the victim even sees or hears what has happened, his reflexes have already reacted to the pain by jerking the arm inwards.   Any bone that might have been damaged in the process has now compounded the situation by ripping through every layer of muscle, tendon, and tissue nearby.  When the bullet finally exits the body, it usually leaves behind a gaping hole, much like the one I now stared at in disgust.  
“Mike!  Hold him down,” my partner said through short and heavy breaths.  I picked my way around the pool of blood that had amassed itself around the body and knelt beside the man, who roared in anguish.  I knelt down on his limbs and pinned him to the ground, holding down his head with one hand and restraining his body with the other. 
“Please, don’t-“ he begged.  My partner silenced him with a blow to the mouth. “You’re going to die tonight pig,” Rogelio hissed, following the threat by spitting on his forehead.  He lit up a cigarette and calmly blew a cloud of smoke into the man’s helpless face, then put out the smoldering butt in the guard’s eye.  The man screamed in anguish.  
“Shut him up will you?” Rogelio ordered.
I leaned over and stared into a pair of frantic, trembling, bloodshot eyes.  Tears welling up at wrinkled eyelids, his grim fate began to seep into the core of his being.  I knew that feeling…when the mind starts to race and the imagination begins to mull over all the ways by which that meager flicker of life remaining within might be snuffed out.  I knew the feeling, and had long since conquered it.  The fact that I inspired the same gut-wrenching terror that had once ruled my own mind gave me the sense of power and self-worth that I could find nowhere else in my desolate world.  
I withdrew a stiletto from my boot and, held the cold hard steel against the distended veins of his neck.  I was within inches of his face, so close that I could feel his clammy, rapid breath on my cheek, hear his pounding heart beating against the walls of his chest, and smell the fear that poured from his skin as tiny beads of sweat.
“You scared pig?” I spat through clenched teeth, forcing the knife even harder against his throat.  “You’re probably wondering when I’m going to put an end to your miserable, groveling life aren’t you? You might even be thinking someone will come to your rescue like you’re some kind of damsel in distress.” 
Whatever desperate plea might have emerged from his mouth fell on deaf ears.  You can’t contemplate anything in a moment like this; your thoughts are consumed by rage and instinct, a deadly combination.  In my mind, this man’s fate had already been decided.  “Don’t cry to me.  You did yourself in by snooping around in other people’s business.  And that’s all this is – business.  Don’t take it personal.”  As I readjusted my grip on the handle and prepared to slit his throat, instinct took over.  It was the glimmer of something that gave me pause, a thin silver chain from which hung a small crucifix.  And all of the sudden, my hatred began to melt away, replaced by doubt.  
“Christ Mike!  Kill him!” Rogelio’s voice came from over my shoulder.
I wanted to.  I wanted to break him like I had been broken, slowly and painfully.  I wanted him to feel the helplessness I had felt my entire miserable life.  At the same time I still clung to the distant hope that one day things would change.  Someday I would be saved.   The crucifix was a shrill reminder of this hope.  “I- I can’t do it.  I can’t play God,” I said at last, hands wavering.
“Mike, listen to me hombre.  This maricón deserves to die.  If you don’t end it right here, he’ll take us all down.  Do you want that on your conscience?” The seriousness of my situation began to sink in, and everything but my roving thoughts faded into the background.   My mind swayed back and forth like the scales of justice.  Vengeance, Mercy, Vengeance, Mercy.  The decision was heavy like stone.
Though it lasted just an instant, it seemed as if time was standing still.  One simple choice: Do…or Don’t.  No turning back. I sighed, releasing blade from shivering flesh, took a step back…and then thrust the knife through his chest.  Eyes wide open with surprise; he stared at me in disbelieving hatred, feeling his life slip away. For a moment it was quiet as we looked over the bloody body.  
The finality of my decision heralded a feeling a guilt I’ll probably never shake.  Rogelio broke the silence.  “Hey come on.  The fellas will be here any minute.  We gotta be ready.”  His footsteps echoed off down the hollow corridor, but I was paralyzed with fear.  My callused hands grasped the crude handle of the knife until the pale white knuckles were covered in dark red blood that ran among my fingers and seeped down onto the concrete.  I let the knife blade clatter to the floor and focused on a pair of frantic, bewildered, dying eyes.  And all I could think of as I stared into those eyes was, “Jesus, what did I do?”
I had plenty of time to figure it out in the state pen.



Prison is nothing short of earthly hell. They took what little I owned, stripped me of my possessions and my dignity, and forced me into the drab, demeaning standard prison issue.  From that moment on I was just another negative statistic to be placed under the strict scrutiny of high society.  Prisoner C479-B, that’s me.  
“You got one call pretty boy,” one of the guards said as he sat me down in front of the pay phone.  “Make it a good one.”  He took a few steps back and tapped his foot impatiently.
I stared at the phone blankly and realized there was no one in my life to which I could turn for help.  “Can I order a pizza into this joint?” I quipped.  
“Don’t get wise with me kid.”  
“How ‘bout the psychic friends network, can I call them?”
“Alright buddy, let’s go.”
I escorted none too gently down what prisoners call the line.  The first trip on the line is sheer torture.  As I stared down the endless rows of monotonous white bars, I realized that I was nowhere.  As a made the seemingly endless walk past the other prisoners’ cells, they let me know that I was nothing.  And as the heavy iron bars slide into place behind me and the walls closed around me, it became painfully obvious that my old way of life was no more.  I was spit at, stared down, and made to feel so small that I could have slipped right between the cracks in the concrete floor if I hadn’t been used to that sort of thing.  They put me on the end of the block in an ancient, rusty cell.  Four years of hell, a bed a toilet, and a condemning rotten smell.  Just me and my thoughts.  Four years.  As the guard’s footsteps retracted down the line, I hung my head in self-defeat.  Nothing, no where, no more.



I’m sure I didn’t help matters much as I stood in the cafeteria the next morning glancing around with a nervous curiosity at my surroundings.  They would become all too familiar by the time I left, but for now I scrutinized every little detail.  Maybe I was looking for a way out, maybe I was trying to make sense of it all, and maybe I just couldn’t believe this would be my reality for the next four years.  The cafeteria was enormous, and I couldn’t help but dart from criminal to hardened criminal, trying to assess what I was up against.  I grabbed a tray and, hearing a high-pitched fast talking voice next to me, turned with mild interest to see who was speaking.
“Yo dog, whatever you do, don’t eat the casserole surprise.  I took a bite of that one time…surprised the HELL out of me, lemme tell ya!  I’d rather eat a turd than this stuff man.”  The voice belonged to a wiry kid with crooked yellow teeth and nervous eyes that darted in all directions as he sized me up.  He extended a hand, which I refused.  
“Mike Davis,” I said, tossing some silverware on my tray and grabbing a napkin.
“Pleased to meet ya,” Lewis said, dropping his hand as an awkward silence passed.  “Yo man, you awful quiet.  They pack your fudge already?”
The abrupt statement unavoidably caught me off guard.  “Say what?” I asked, raising a brow.
“Oh, uh, nuthin’.  Hey!” the shout was directed to one of the cafeteria workers.  “A little more Jell-O!”  
I watched in disgust as food was slopped on my tray.  I took a seat in the corner of the dining hall only to find Lewis right behind me, taking a seat beside my own.  I figured since I probably wasn’t going to get rid of him, I might as well put up with him.
“A’ight dog, since you’re new, I’m gonna tell ya a few things that’s gonna save yo butt.  You got basically three choices in here.  You either gang up, lay low, or go it alone and hope you make some friends along the way.”
“Yeah?  What’d you choose?”
“Aww hell man.  I chose to go it alone.  Gangs are protection, but it’s also like slavery with them.  You owe them a debt that you will never pay off, not even in death.  ‘Sides, I don’t need those busters.  I can handle mine.”  The boast was delivered with wavering confidence.
“They wouldn’t take you, would they?”
“Uh…not exactly, I mean, it’s like-, see the truth is…yeah, they turned me down.  Anyway,” he said, switching the topic, “most folks that run an’ hide, they go INSANE up in here.  I had this one rommate man, he used to gnaw on his bed sheets and hide under his bed talkin’ crazy, he used to play around in the toilet water for God’s sake.”
“Well, gangs are what got me here in the first place, and I ain’t about to run and hide.  I guess I only got one choice,” I concluded.
“In that case, the first thing you gotta do then is prove your worth as a man, know what I’m sayin’?  People don’t care if you’s educated, compassionate, generous.  If you wanna earn respect you gotta be a fast talker, strong in a fight, stay on your toes.  Like me.”
I scoffed at the thought.  “Right Lewis.  I’ll keep it mind.”
“Oh and watch out for them guards,” Lewis added.  “They’re the most shady characters in this place.” 


When they put you in prison, they want you to know that your life is meaningless, and so they set you to the task of the most repetitive, useless, and self-depreciating chores imaginable.  The work didn’t phase me all that much because it kept my mind off time.  I was down in the unbearable heat of the boiler room aimlessly mopping a stretch of dusty concrete when one of the higher-ups on the prison food chain called out, “hey fish!”  Fish is what they call all the new guys.  The man walked over to me and thrust a mop into my unexpecting arms, kicking the empty bucket, which skidded across the floor just behind me.  “Small fish in a big pond,” he said, letting out a low whistle.  “Somebody just lost it in psychiatry.  Guess who gets to clean it up?”  The feeling of superiority and dominance showed clearly on his face, and I returned it with a hint of defiance and despise, then grabbed the bucket and mop and headed up to the psych ward.  
I could smell the mess before I could see it.  As I pushed open the door and stepped across onto the cool white tile the stench of blood, sweat, and vomit clung to my senses.  Looking in I saw a man in an orange prison jumpsuit lying facedown in a dark red pool, two guards leaning menacingly over his motionless form.  One of the guards kicked him in the stomach and cursed at him, and without thinking I responded by charging him and pushing him over, sending him sprawling across the room.  The other man drew a firearm but was stopped short by a loud, shrill voice.
“Enough!  You guys want the warden up here?”  It was the voice of the prison psychiatrist.
The mention of the warden’s name sparked obedience in the mind of the two guards.  They stepped back from the body and slowly made for the door.  As they were walking off, one of them pointed back to me.  “You better mind your own business pal.  Next time you won’t have anyone there to break it up.”  I stared him down but said nothing. 
On the edge of the sink, head between his hands, the doctor sat pulling at the ends of his dark, matted hair in frustration.  “I can’t work like this anymore,” he moaned.  
“Christ,” was all I could think to say.  “What in God’s name happened here?”  
The doc looked up through reddened eyes.  “Who are you?”
“I’m the guy that’s gotta clean this stuff up.  Wanna make yourself useful?”  The doctor slid off the edge of the sink and trudged over to my side.  With his help I rolled the guy out of the puke and onto his back.  “Tell 'ya what, you clean him up and I’ll clean this floor.  Deal?”  The doctor nodded absently, and I set to mopping up the stench.  At length I asked, “alright, I can understand the puke man, but the blood?  This guy’s got welts all over.”
The doctor sighed.  “The guards beat him up.  I guess he knew too much.”
I didn’t pursue the subject.  Less you know about what goes on in a place like this, the better off you are. 
“He was up here for final review.  Perfectly healthy, normal guy.  Most of the prisoners liked him just fine, which is rare.  But those guards, they had it in for him.  Now…who knows when he’ll be outta here.”  
“This guy’s up for release you said?” I asked, the notion striking a chord of envy.  I had so much further to go.
“Two months.  I just hope he doesn’t leave in a wheelchair.”  
We finished our respective duties and it looked like the fella was coming to his senses a little.  “Crooked cops” I spat.  “It’s a crying shame.  I don’t know if they’re worse on the outside or in here.  Wish I’d a been here when it all went down.”
Nervously, the doctor implored, “you have to promise not to say a word to anybody, alright?”
“You think I want any more trouble then I already got?  My lips are sealed man.”  
We helped the man up off the floor and each lent a shoulder to carry him out of the ward and down to the infirmary.  As we neared the infirmary doors, he mumbled something and started coming to his senses.  The doctor flashed his ID tags to a rigid guard who let us in, and as we passed through the swinging doors we were greeted by a stunningly beautiful nurse.  Amidst the crude surroundings she stuck out like an oasis in the desert.  She dropped her jaw and covered her mouth at the sight of the wounded man.  
“Oh…” she whimpered.  “What happened?”  At her soothing voice our patient seemed to snap awake.  The doctor chuckled.  
“They always seem to perk right up with her.”  
“Let’s get you out of these clothes,” the nurse said, wrinkling her nose at the stained prison linens.  “Thanks for bringing him down boys.  I’ll take good care of him now.”  
I nodded nonchalantly, and as we walked off I could have sworn I saw the patient look back and flash a quick grin at me. 


At the end of the day, dirt-covered and dog-tired, I headed back to my cell.  A solid day’s work was about the only remedy to the lack of sleep that came with sleeping on the old rock prison mattress.   As the cell gates opened and I prepared to hit the sack, I noticed that my bed sheets and pillow were missing.
“Hey little fish,” I heard a voice whisper from the next cell.  “Sleep tight, eh?”
“Where’s my sheets man?”
“Hey, last new fish in that cell got rats in his bed and maggots in his soup, so don’t get hot on me now.  This is all just part of makin’ you feel welcome.  You’ll get them back in a couple a weeks, if you’re good.  By the way, thanks for your help in the ward today.”  The voice was deep and slow, patient as if the man had all the time in the world.
“That was you?” 
I heard the man release a tired, aged chuckle.  
“Put up a pretty good fight, didn’t I?”
“Hey, all I saw was you lying in a puddle of puke and blood.”
“Aww, you missed all the action.  Floatin’ like a butterfly, stingin’ like a bee, just like the great Ali.  I sent one to the hospital, I hear.” 
“The doctor told me you were up for release here pretty quick.  You’re a fool to be startin’ static just before release.  I mean, putting a security guard in the hospital is good for at least another six months in the cell, way I understand things.”
“You don’t understand nothin’ yet, fish.  Prison’s a game with a whole new set of rules.  Hey, let me tell you something that will keep you alive here.  You ain’t never gonna prove anything.  You gotta stay small.  Don’t ever let ‘em see you coming.  Make a few friends, scratch a few backs, and try not to step on anybody’s toes.  Me, I got in a little over my head, found out about a few things I wasn’t supposed to know.  But let the chips fall where they may, eh?  Main thing is, those cops can try to scare me, maybe even put a few scratches in me, but they can’t keep me locked down.  Besides, I enjoy a good scuffle now and then.  Gives me a chance to visit the infirmary.”  The unrestrained enthusiasm of that last sentence rang clear as it echoed down the line.  “That’s why you did it!  You sly dog.  You wanted to see that nurse huh?”
“Diamond in the rough ain’t she?  Anna’s her name.  Anna Lucero.  I pay her a visit now and then.  You know, it’s the little things in this place like her smilin’ face that keeps me holdin’ on in here.  What she’s doing working in a dismal place like this with a bunch of screw ups and crazies I’ll never know.”
“You two have a little something going on?” 
The prisoner next to me bellowed in raucous laughter.  “C’mon, old con like me?  Why you think a girl like that would waste her time with me?  She does like to humor a brother though.  She just likes to make people feel good, any old way she can.  And if it means tossing a few flirtatious smiles my way, that’s fine by me.”
The thought of this old jailbird trying to work his game with that angel of a nurse brought a smile to my face.  As the smile faded I asked, “so what are you in here for anyway?”
The man’s own laughter stopped abruptly, and his voice turned stern.  “It doesn’t matter son.  You hear me?  The sooner you forget the past and move on, the better off you’ll be.  It does no good think about how you got here or when you’ll get out.  You gotta find a light in all this darkness, and if your light is the one that shines outside these prison walls, then you got a long and painful wait. 
“Well…what’s your name?  Or should I just forget that people were ever given names?”  
“You tell me why it matters whether or not you know my name?”
I paused, then admitted, “cuz I don’t want to be all alone in here.”
I heard a drawn out sigh from the next cell.  “I suppose that’s as good a reason as any.  Name’s Chris Wallace.  People call me Pops, guess that’s because I’m old enough to be their dad.” 
“Pops huh?  I’d rather have you be my pops than my own father.  Now my Mom, she was somethin’ else.  I got a picture of her.  I grabbed the old tattered portrait that I kept beside my bed and tossed out in front of the bars by Chris’ cell.  
He took it and let out a whistle.  “Mmmm, mmmm.  She is a firecracker ain’t she?  Beautiful!”
“Yeah, she was a sweetheart, from what I remember of her.  Well Pops, my name is Mike.  It’s good to meet ya.”
“Hey Mike…” Chris paused.   “Today’s your lucky day.  I’m gonna show you the ropes.  If you play your cards right, you might just get out of here with your manhood, your sanity, maybe even your dignity.
“How bout my sheets, can I get those too?”
“Don’t push it.”



“Malcolm, this is Mike.  He did me a little favor the other day, and I was wonderin’ if you could hook him up on the mail route, show him the ropes.”  We were down in the mailroom and Chris was talking to Malcolm, the head of the mail department.  Chris told me he would help me find a decent job that would help me get to know my way around the pen and get me out of scrubbin’ up puke.  The job was to deliver mail on the block.  
Malcolm started shaking his head.  “I don’t know Chris,” he said, sizing me up.  “People would kill for this job.  This kid is brand new.  Fellas won’t take to kindly to a fish out of water.”
“I’m willing to forget that little debt you owe me.”
“Yeah but – “
“It’s not a request Malcolm.”  
Malcolm cast a skeptical glance in my direction.  “Alright kid.  Get suited up, I’ll take you through the rounds.”
Two hours later we were working the yard under a calm blue sky, and I couldn’t have felt happier about leaving my janitorial duties behind.  As we began passing out mail, Lewis ran up beside to tag along.  
“What’s up big timer!” Lewis said, slapping me on the shoulder.  “You don’t mess around!  How’d you end up on the mail route?”  I ignored him and fished out the letter.
“Johnson,” Malcolm yelled.  An enormous man emerged from a crowd of cons and stepped over to us.  
“Yeah?” Johnson asked in a booming voice.  
“Summons.” I handed him the letter.  
Johnson snatched the letter from my hands, gave it a quick glance, and handed it to one of his cronies, turning back to stare me down.  
“You should be in the laundry room washing my dirty draws, fish,” he said, shoving me backward a couple of steps.  
“Hey I don’t want trouble, and I sure don’t want anything to do with you and your ‘draws’.”  
“Ohhhh…boy,” Lewis said, stepping back a few paces.  
I could tell I was gonna have a problem on my hands when he balled a massive fist, reared back, and unleashed towards my face.  Now, the best way to fight a big man is to use your quickness.  Obviously in a straight-up fistfight this Johnson character would mess me up pretty good.  Plus, beating the living daylights out of somebody ain’t the best way to win friends and influence people, if you know what I mean.
As the fist neared my face I swung my body sideways and blocked the blow with a thrust to his wrist, leaving him stunned.  In that split second of weakness I seized the upper hand.  I grabbed the man’s shoulder and dug into his flesh with my finger, finding the pressure point below that caused him to wince in pain and send his free hand shooting up toward the point of injury.  I responded by sliding under his arm and pulling it behind his back, following through with a swift kick to the back of the legs that sent him tumbling to the dirt.  I brushed myself off, and scanned the bemused crowd, waiting for an angry reaction.  
Lewis was prancing around like a prizefighter, taunting Johnson, who lay immobile in the dirt.  “Yeah!  Yeah!  Get up sucka!”
Finally Malcolm shrugged and grabbed the next piece of mail.  “Jamal Jenkins?”


Later, as I was walking the line, passing out mail, I came across Johnson’s cell.  “How’s it goin’ pal?” I said with a grin.  He rolled his shoulder and kneaded the muscles with his enormous paws.  
“My shoulder hurts.”  
“Hey, no hard feelings man,” I said, slapping down a pack of cigs down on the bars.  Johnson just looked at me funny and didn’t say anything, but I did look back a minute later to see that the pack had disappeared from on top of the bars.  
That night as I prepared to hit the sack I heard Chris whisper from the next cell, “hey, nice work today kid.  Regular Bruce Lee.  ‘Cept you white.  You might just make it in here after all.  Get some sleep.  We got a lot of work to do tomorrow.”
Within the next few weeks Chris proved to be my hookup for just about everything.  If there was a poker game going on, I was at the table putting names to faces.  If Chris had an inside deal for some smokes, cash, maybe extra privileges on the work shift or private time during visiting hours, I was part of it.  He knew everybody, and as a result I knew everybody.  I became a familiar face around the yard, a guy who knew how to make moves.  I don’t know why Chris decided to help me out; maybe he saw something in me that I couldn’t see myself.  All I know is that if he hadn’t schooled me to the game, I’d probably still be locked up.  
Don’t get me wrong.  I didn’t go through the whole ordeal untouched.  Jealousy runs rampant and unrestrained in prison.  There were lots of guys who wanted my lot, and to tell the truth, probably deserved it more than me.  Eventually I gained respect, but it was hard earned.  I may have been able to hold my own against some big uncoordinated prison thug, but there were nights when I laid down and felt pain from a dozen cuts and bruises after fights with the inmates.   I remember one fight in particular.
I was makin’ my way through the yard as usual, delivering mail with Lewis one step behind, when we heard some commotion off by the basketball court.  Amidst a big cloud of dust two people were brawling, while the rest of the inmates gathered around to cheer.  
“Yo check it out dog, royal rumble!” Lewis said, pointing excitedly.  
“Who is that?  Martin?” I asked.
“Nah man.  Looks like someone from the V to me.”
“The V?”
“Yo man, you ain’t heard about the Vatio Trese yet?  You’re lucky.  Rough crowd of Southern Mexicans boy.  Brothas don’t give a damn whether they live or die.  Life’s as hard for them on the outside as it is in here, and they hate everyone because of it.  All they care about is La Raza, they’re like one big family.  Yo, I crossed their path one time, fools took my clothes and hung me up by my underwear to that barb wire fence over there.  Left me hangin’ for an hour.”
I stared at the brawl, thinking back to my brief stint with Rogelio.  “Screw La Raza man.”  I spit on the ground.  “La Raza’s what got me into this whole thing in the first place.” Lewis started motioning wildly but I wasn’t really paying attention.   “Damn beaners.  They’re just askin’ for trouble.”
I felt a finger thump my shoulder, and all of the sudden I realized my mistake.  I swallowed and turned slowly, and the first thing I saw was a fist to my jaw.  I felt someone’s weight on top of me, sending me to the dirt, and as we rolled over and came to a stop I saw Lewis looking over us in slack-jawed fear.  
“Awwww….no.  Yo, Mike.  I uh…I gotta go.  Good luck holmes.” 
Within seconds more members of LaRaza were upon me, and all I could do was curl up and take the abuse.  I closed my eyes as blood and pain poured from a hundred different wounds.  As my head began to spin and my body began to go numb, I wondered if I was going to die right then and there.  Luckily, I heard a far off sounding voice ordering the prisoners to break it up.



The bad news was that the back of my head felt like a mashed potato when they were through pounding it into the concrete, and I had some nice bloody wounds to go with it.  The good news is I got to see Anna.  And let me tell you, there is nothing I’d rather wake up to after being knocked unconscious.  As my vision cleared and my head stopped spinning I saw her troubled face hovering over me, soft hands tending to my wounds with a cold washcloth.  I muttered something unintelligible as I rose from my stupor, and she smiled gently.  
“Does your head hurt?” she asked in words that drifted sweetly on the air as they were spoken.  The truth was, I felt like I’d been hit by a Mack truck and I probably looked about the same, but I didn’t tell her that.  
“Nah, I’m alright.  Did I kick some ass?” 
Anna pursed her full, pouting lips and was about to speak, then paused and reformulated what she was saying.  “You got a lot of anger in those dark eyes of yours.  A lot of hurt.  There are better ways to deal with those guys than violence, though.”
“I can’t think of any.”  
Anna didn’t look pleased.  “Maybe that’s because you don’t understand where they come from.  Being Latino is a hard life Mike.  Those guys are treated like dogs, no better than slaves.”
“I just get so mad sometimes, you know.  All I want is to be left alone, and every time I turn the corner somebody’s trying to break me down or take what I got.  That’s the story of my life.  I feel like cellblock livestock in here.  
“Maybe if you could just let things slide once and awhile you might be able to build yourself up for once instead of tear yourself down.”  Anna looked at me as if she had reached some quiet revelation, then asked, “so how did you end up in a place like this?”  
I frowned.  “It doesn’t do any good to talk about it.”  
“Did Pops tell you that?” she asked, already anticipating the answer.  “You know, confronting the pain is how you heal.  Nobody ever healed by ignoring their problem.”
I thought about that, then sidestepped the issue.  “Yeah, well, truth is I don’t really know how I got here.  My story is about the same as any other two-bit con in the joint, I figure.  Moms left when I was young cuz Dad was a mean drunk.  My brother-“ I stopped to suppress my swelling emotions.  “Ah, it doesn’t matter.  What I gotta figure out is how to get out.”  I think Anna realized she couldn’t budge me on this one, so she let the subject drop.  But not without a look of concern and a heartfelt gaze into my eyes.   “What’s your story?”
“Not much of a story here.  I grew up with everything a girl could want.  Good parents, big house, solid education, lots of encouragement.  None of it made me happy though.  This – this is what makes me happy.”
“Hanging out in a prison is what makes you happy?  You’re not into that dominatrix stuff are you?”
“Oh God.  Grow up.”
“Well, why else would you hang around a bunch of deranged murderers, druggies, and thieves, Just for kicks?  Just to realize how good you got it?  Hey, I’m sorry.  Help me understand, please.”
“Well I don’t see it that way.  When I look at you I don’t see a convict.  I see a kid in front of me who is lost, tired, probably pretty damn lonely.  I’ll be happy when they fix you up, when I can finally get some positive ideas into that thick skull of yours, alright?”  I smiled.  “Smiles are rare in here,” she said, running her fingers through my hair.
“Well you definitely made me feel better.  I was afraid I’d wake up to some guy named Bubba standing over me with his pants down.  This is much better.”
Anna laughed, flashing a full and stunning smile.  “Yeah well, don’t get used to this.  Come tomorrow you’ll be back on your feet.  And back into trouble no doubt.”  She rose from her spot by my bed, leaned over, and gave me a soft, lingering kiss on the forehead.  “Now get some rest.”
“How’s a guy supposed to sleep after that?” I asked.  As her footsteps disappeared down the hall, I laid back and smiled.

 “I think I’m in love Pops,” I said to Chris the next day.  He and Lewis and I were sitting in the mess hall eating  something that tasted like rubber, smelled like engine oil, and looked as if it had been pried up from the asphalt alongside the highway.
“Yeah, well, don’t get too attached, I’m warning you.  Love’s got no business being in a place like this.”
“Yeah, tell me about it,” Chris chimed in.  “One time I thought I was in love with this girl Yolanda from cell block C.  Turns out the girl was doin’ time for cuttin’ a brothas nuts off man!” 
Chris and I gave Lewis an aggravated stare, and Chris continued.  “Now, I think you’re pretty sharp kid, don’t get me wrong.  But you got a few things to learn, and I ain’t got a whole lot of time to teach it to you.” 
“Why’d you get into crime?”
“I needed the money.”
“Of course you did.  You think you’re gonna just do a brief stint right, get back on your feet, and that’ll make you happy?  There’s a lot of unhappy rich folks out there.  Lot of dead rich folks too.  Now, this nurse, Anna.  Why do you like her?”
“I’ll tell you why I like her!” Chris said leaning in.  “Boomin’ system up top, just enough chunk in the trunk, more tight curves then a mountain highway boy!”
“Shut up Lewis!” Chris and I said simultaneously, smacking him upside the head.  
“Owwww, man!  What?”
“She is beautiful though pops.”
“But beauty don’t last forever.  See man, it’s what’s in here that counts.”  Chris beat on his chest.
“Amen,” Lewis said.  
“Now you gotta figure out whether you like this girl because of who she is or because she’s got a pretty face and a beautiful body,” Chris continued.  “Cuz if that’s the case, I’ll go get you a dirty magazine and you can knock yourself out.”
“You done preaching Pops?” I said, standing to excuse myself from the table.
“Yeah I’m through.  But you,” he said pointing a thick finger, “you are far from being done thinking.”  
“Yo pops.  You think you could get me some of them dirty magazines?” Lewis asked.



“Alright Mike, you’re on the clock,” Malcolm said, pushing the squeaky old mail cart my way.  “I’m off to see my baby’s momma,” he said with a wink that suggested the activities to come.  I couldn’t help but feel a little bit envious.  I started thinking about the nurse, hoping my rounds would take me past the infirmary.  I started out in the yard.
“Hey Mike,” one of the inmates yelled.  “Got time for some hoops?”
“Gotta do these rounds man.”
“Chump.”
“Hey, harder I work in here, the less time I’ll have to spend looking at your ugly mug.”  The state was paying me thirty minutes jail time for every hour I worked in here, and I planned to make my stay in the pen as short as possible.  
“Hadlin,” I called out, moving a long.  He looked up.  
“What you got?”
“Looks like some junk mail.  You want to subscribe to the New York Times?”  
Hadlin scoffed.  “Only Times I buy into is doin’ time and makin’ time.  I don’t know nothin’ about that New York Times.”  He took the mail anyways.  In prison you’ll take anything that keeps you grounded to the outside world.  I continued to work the yard, making small talk and cracking jokes, trying to dig up info on poker games or deals going down.  Eventually as I neared the bottom of the mailbag I came across some mail to be sent to Doctor Kinnick in the infirmary.  I grinned.
As I entered the infirmary I saw Anna right off the bat, looking good as usual.  “Nurse, help!  I got a cramp.  Oh God.  Nurse you’ve got to massage this thing before it kills me.”  
Anna cracked a smile.  “This facility is for people who have serious injuries or sicknesses.”
“I got a sickness.”
Anna raised a disbelieving brow.  “Yeah?”
“Yeah, I’m lovesick.”
Anna rolled her eyes.  “Cute Mike.”
“I’ll settle for some drugs then,” I joked, but failed to draw amusement to her delicate features.  “Just kidding, I’m not like that.”
“Oh, right, you’re one of those gospel loving convicts.”
“What?” I said, doing my best to look shocked.  “You don’t believe me?”  
“Mike, what I believe is that you need to get yourself some dirty magazines and stop wasting my time.”
“People keep telling me that.  Hey, you remembered my name.  Never forget a pretty face, right?”
“I remember all my patient’s names.”
“Oh,” I said, disheartened.  “Well, I came down here because Doc’s got a package to sign for.”
“I’ll page him.”  The nurse paced seductively over to the phone and I watched in lustful awe.  She made the call, then returned to sit cross-legged on one of the examination tables.  “How’s your head?”
“Ah, it’s fine,” I said, quickly switching the subject.  “You know I used to spend a fair amount of time in the emergency room.”
“What, having your head examined?”
“No, I was an EMT.  What, you don’t think some street-punk felon could do something worthwhile?”
“You’re an EMT?  I don’t buy it.”
“Try me.”
“Alright, what position am I in?” she asked, lying down seductively on her side with one arm at tucked in, the other just above her head.
“That’s the ‘take me to bed or lose me forever’ position, right?”  She giggled, then straightened her smile.
“Seriously.”
“Seriously?  Left lateral recumbent.”
“And when do you use it?”
“When you transport patients who are pregnant.  Look, is that a subtle hint, because if so, why don’t you just go out and say what’s on your mind.”
“No that’s not a hint, but I am impressed.”
“If you think that’s good, you should see some of the other things I can do,” I said with a wink, as the Doctor walked in.  
“Making light with the inmates again I see Miss Lucero,” said Doctor Kinnick as he pulled a pen from his lab coat.  Anna shot up and brushed aside her hair nervously, blushing uncontrollably.  “Mike here is an EMT, she said.  
“Really,” the Doctor said, unenthused.  “Well that should come in handy the next time you get into one of your prison brawls.  Maybe we won’t have to keep stitching you up, eh?”  
“Let’s hope not sir.”   I handed the Doctor the package and forms, which he signed and returned.  “Thank you very much, and keep your eye on this nurse.  She’s quite the flirt.” I winked at her and her jaw slackened in shock.  “See ya later toots.”



“I think I’m startin’ to get used to this prison stuff Pops,” I said to Chris in one of our usual late night discussions between cells.  “I never thought I’d be sayin’ I’d be doin’ easy time but-“
“No such thing as easy time.  Life ain’t easy time, let alone prison.  You’ll see.  I hate to remind you, but I’m out of here in a couple of weeks.  Things are gonna change real fast, real soon.  Just remember, life is full of suffering.  You want to succeed, you gotta find meaning in the suffering.”
It dawned on me how short on time I really was with Chris.  I wondered how I would do when I had to fend for myself, no backup.  “Pops, I gotta tell you…I owe you my life.  You’re about the only person that has ever looked out for me.  I just -“
“Save it man,” Chris interjected.  “I know.”
And somehow I felt like maybe he did know.  For once in my life I felt like I’d met somebody who had seen what I had seen, felt the loneliness I had felt, and restrained the anger and violence I had struggled so many years to hold back.  “Sometimes when you lose, you win,” Chris added.  I heard him roll over in bed.  It took me much longer to go to sleep though.  I had a lot on my mind.



One night I was getting off my rounds and I heard a commotion coming from the laundry room.  No words, just scuffling like someone was sneaking around and running.  I ducked my head in the door and saw several shadows.  The faint outline of a handgun framed itself in the dim light that seeped through the partially cracked door.  Reaching my arm through the narrow opening I fumbled around for the light switch and flicked it upward.  The halogens buzzed with life and the figures, which I could now see to be security guards, spun abruptly to face me.
“This doesn’t concern you boy,” one guard said in a southern drawl.  I surveyed the scene.  Four guards, all armed, standing around a limp figure bent over a laundry bin with his hands tied behind his back and his mouth stuffed with a pillowcase.  It didn’t take me long to realize what was going on.  It was Chris.
“Actually, it does concern me.  See, that’s my best friend who’s tied up right there, and I’m just a little bit curious as to why.”  Chris looked up in surprise.
“Well, shoot, come on over here and we’ll tie you up.  I’ll show you why.”  I started walking over with my hands held in front of me, as if offering to be tied.  Two of the guards approached cautiously, nightsticks in hand, as I remained still.  One of the guards swung down at me with the nightstick and I slid my body out of harm’s way.  I grabbed the wrist of the guard with the nightstick, and his blow struck my wrist with diminished yet excruciating force.  I swung my blocking hand upward and caught the guard’s neck in my hand, bringing his head down to greet my upward driving knee.  Blood erupted from his nose and he slumped to the ground in pain.
My attention turned quickly to the other guard who by now was bearing down on me with his own nightstick.  I ducked quickly as the shaft cut through the air above my head, then swept him to the ground with my foot.  He dropped the nightstick and I kicked it across the floor, out of reach.  The guard rolled back up and approached me, fists raised and prepared to strike.  He had me cornered against a wall full of cleaning supplies, and as my mind raced desperately for somewhere to maneuver, my hands brushed against the detergent bin.  I grabbed a handful of the powder, and as the guard wound up to punch me, I tossed it in his eyes.  He roared in pain, raking at his eyelids with his fingers.  I seized the opportunity to knock him over and scan the room for the other two guards.  
I quickly spotted Chris who was now huddled in a ball and bleeding from numerous abrasions.  I couldn’t see any of the remaining guards.
“Look out!” Chris said weakly.  
At that moment I felt a set of gloved hands gripping my neck.  In front of me the other guard slid out from behind the water main and jumped out at me with his nightstick.  I quickly spun and rolled the guard who was choking me over my shoulder.  The two guards collided and we all went sprawling across the floor.  I rolled away as a nightstick left a resounding crash on the floor just beside me.  
The guard who had delivered the blow crawled forward to his feet, intent on seeing me bleed.  I rushed over to the laundry bin, grabbed and quickly rolled a bed sheet, holding it taut between my outstretched arms.  As the guard swung down on me with the weapon I caught it in the sheet and kicked upward, knocking it from the guard’s hand.  
All of the sudden, as both guards closed in on me, the room erupted with light and two guards and the warden appeared, guns drawn.  Everyone threw their hands in the air and eminent fear waxed apparent across the faces of the guards.  
“Looks like you got a lot of explaining to do boys,” I said, imitating that southern drawl as I kneaded the muscles of my bruised limbs.
“So do you,” the Warden said to me.  I shut up.



“We have to stop meeting like this Mike,” Anna said as the guards escorted me into the infirmary, black-eyed, bloody, and all.  
“You would suggest some place more quaint?  How ‘bout the men’s bathroom?  When they spray that Lysol stuff in there it doesn’t smell half bad.”
“I’m serious Mike.  When are you gonna cut this out?”
“They were bad guys, what can I say?”
“Oh and you’re an angel?  Funny, I could have sworn you were a convicted felon.”
“Yeah you keep reminding me.  And first of all, who are you to judge?  Miss ‘I was born with spoon in my hand and a four leaf clover up my-“
“That’s not fair,” she said heatedly.  
“Life ain’t fair.”
Anna took a deep breath.  “Look, all I’m saying is, you want to impress me, get out of here, get out of trouble, turn things around. 
“You’re right.”
“I don’t want to be right.  I want to help you,” she said with unmistakable sincerity.  I suddenly became conscious of her hand on my cheek, her warm breath on my skin, and got lost in her deep-feeling eyes, finding everything I thought I needed within.  I kissed her then, half expecting her to pull away and slap me across the face, but instead she embraced me tightly.  It seemed an eternity before she pulled away.  
She stared at me and smiled, then a worried look washed over her.  “This really complicates things.”
“It doesn’t have to.”
“It’s just that-“
“I know, I know,” I said, getting up and patting her on the shoulder.  “How could I forget?  I’m a convicted felon.”  I turned my back and left the room with far too much unsaid.



“I think I’m getting old,” I groaned, sitting on the cold hard floor of my cell later that night. 
Chris let out a tired chuckle from his own cell.  “Look who’s talkin’ kid.  I’m the oldest dog on this block.  How do you think I feel?  By the way, where’d you learn all those ninja kicks and stuff.  That could come in handy in a place like this.”
“Back when I was livin’ with my pops I used to dream about they day I could kick his ass.  Some days I’d sit outside the window of this old martial arts place and watch their every move, running through the routine over and over in my mind.  I imagined myself beatin’ on my dad till he begged me to stop.  Never had the heart to hurt him though.”
“Well, whatever it was, thanks man.  I mean it.  Who knows what those crackers woulda done to me.”
“Ah, don’t mention it.  We’re even.”
“It’s not about being even.  It’s about looking out for each other.”
I gave a sound of agreement.  At length I said, “Look Chris.  What was that all about, I’m dying to know.  And don’t tell me they just wanted to give you a going away present.”
“Hang around here long enough and you’ll hear and see things you wouldn’t believe man.”
“What’s gonna happen?”
“To you and me?  I’ll be released, the guards will be fired, they’ll throw you in the hole, and everyone will be ‘strongly persuaded’ to forget the whole thing ever happened.”
“There gonna throw me in the hole?  For helping out an innocent prisoner?”  
“Ain’t a man on this earth that’s innocent, partner, especially not a convicted felon like me.  We all gotta pay our debts sometime, some of us just got more debts than others.”  
“Yeah well I think that’s bullshit,” I said, swallowing down anger-laden fear.  I’d heard about the hole.
“I don’t make the rules Mike.  Don’t worry.  Hole ain’t that bad if you know how to handle it.”
“That’s not what I hear.”



It all went down just like Chris said.  I woke in the morning to the sound of keys in the lock.  “Alright.  Time to say goodbye Pops,” a voice called out.  I heard Pops step outside the cell.
As I swiped the sleep from my weary eyes, I saw two guards entering my cell.  “And you-one week of solitary.  Warden’s orders.”  I got up slowly and they cuffed me tightly, marching me out onto the line.
Chris was waiting for me outside with a wide grin, hands unbound.  I couldn’t help but smile, despite my current dilemma.  “Yeah, easy for you to smile, you aren’t gonna be surrounded in darkness for the next 7 days.”  I shook my head in disbelief.  “You’re a free man Pops…going home at last.”
“Shoot, I’ve been gone so long, I don’t know where home is, or if I’d recognize it when I got there.”
“I’m gonna miss you Pops.”  
“C’mon man, this ain’t no funeral, and I ain’t your girlfriend, so keep your sentimentality to yourself.  ‘Sides, I have a feeling we’ll meet up some day.”
“Alright let’s go,” one of the guards interjected.  With that, Chris strolled down the line to the farewells and congratulations of various prisoners, and I couldn’t help but burst with pride.  As for me, well…
“All right Mr. Davis,” the guard began in a formal tone.  “You’ve been charged with a week of solitary confinement for imposing violent physical action upon prison authority.  The officers involved have been released from duty, and Mr. Wallace has been pardoned of any and all wrongdoing.  We advise that you come quietly and forget that this whole thing ever happened.”
I complied, and as I was ushered away from my cell, no congratulations or words of encouragement arose from the line.  No ‘way to go’ or ‘sorry to hear’ just a few vacant stares and several words of condolence.  The slam of thick iron bars pronounced my sentence.  The tiny jangle from a ring of keys sealed my fate.  The fading echo of heavy footsteps carried away all hope. One week of nothing but thick, oppressive darkness.



Part II

It took awhile for me to realize that the darkness surrounding me was not that of a jail cell and my trouble-ridden past, but instead that of my posthumous demise.  Gone were the corpses, replaced an eerie stillness that chilled me to the bone and seemed to last an eternity.  Then it began.
It started quietly at first, more of a feeling in the tips of the toes and the hairs on the neck than something real and visceral.  Slowly it manifested itself into something more substantial; a slight ripple of light on the horizon of sight, growing larger and larger as it approached with increased velocity.  A noise like crashing waves filled my ears and crescendoed as the wave of light bore down upon me.  Towering above, this supernatural enigma threatened to crush me, and I ducked and cowered in helpless fear.
Nothing happened.  No shuddering impact, no crash, no pain.  At length I opened my eyes, looked down, and saw myself surrounded by a lucent, water-like substance that distorted my dark reality.  The sound of ocean waves was replaced by that of a gently drifting stream.  As I leaned to touch the strange substance, I saw my reflection cast on the dim, wavering surface.  Only it was not me, not quite.  
The apparition in the reflection mimicked my every movement, only where flesh would be on my own body, only bone remained.  I realized I was looking at the remnants of myself.  The reality that I was dead ran through me like a shockwave.  I bent over once again to confirm the fact, and when I did, I saw the reflection of a hundred faces from my past, each conjuring up its own painful recollection in my hopelessly perplexed mind.  I tried to fight them off, but the images prevailed.  Soon my mind was overrun by memories, and I submitted to the confrontation of my past.



Vivid memories long thought dead were reawakened from their slumber in the deepest parts of my mind.  An old beat up orange truck that belonged to my dad.  The pristine view of our tiny town from on top of Engineer Pass.  A load of firewood by the tailgate, the whole family bundled up in puffy winter coats and wool hats, smiles on everyone’s face.  I used to let my imagination run free in those days.  I figured anything was possible.  I would be the superhero; my brother flew a plane.  Dad would proudly lead the way up the mountainside and Mom would take her time, picking her way among the loose rock and withered tree roots as she soaked up every serene aspect of her surroundings.  Those were happier days.   Six days.



I can still see her picture in my restless mind.  It lies on a rickety wooden dresser within a gold paint frame.  Wiping away the dust that has collected on the glass I can distinguish her every feature.  Her curly brown hair, her weary, wrinkle-lined skin, the trace of a forced smile at the corners of her thin, smooth lips.  Most of all I remember those eyes.  Though most of the picture is faded and crinkled, those big brown eyes have not lost a bit of their warmth.  They stare past the confines of the fragile glass frame, past the clutches of our oppressive home, out of our crime-beleaguered neighborhood, off into the horizon towards some place far greater. 
My mother left us, and I don’t blame her.  Five days.



Light slowly retreated from the room, steadily overtaken by shadows.  The echoes of the last pair of footsteps had long since faded, and I alone remained.  From within the lapel of the rented suit I pulled out the letter.  I think sometimes that letter was the only thing that kept me going from day to day.  I had long ago made a promise to myself never to lose it.  I took a deep breath and began to read.
Well Mike, I think you’ve found your own.  Tonight I was out running, out in the cornfields past old man Heyward’s place.  The sun was setting and it was beautiful.  I was trying to push myself and breathe smooth but I couldn’t do it right.  Then I started thinking of you, that long stride, your shoulders tipping left and right as you ran.  I couldn’t help but smile.  When we would go running there was no way I could keep up with you.  I never wanted you to know that, but hey, it’s true.  The day you joined track with me I knew things were going to happen.  For some reason when we were both sitting down on that track before the race, I felt relaxed, and I knew we’d do all right.  
I know one thing; your day is coming.  All of this crap: money, Dad’s job, school, it doesn’t matter.  All you need to do is be strong, have faith, and be prepared for what ever is in store.  You’ve earned it.  The last few days I’ve been praying for you.  I don’t know why.  I never prayed seriously in my life.  You’ve taken all this burden and you carried it quietly, like nothing could shake you.  Just do what you think is right, because it is, and one day you’ll look back on the times you were strong and others just fell in.  I love you,
 Scott.

A solitary tear rolled down my cheek and splashed onto the page.  It slowly trickled its way across the lines of ink, smearing them slightly.  I folded up the paper again as I had done so many time before, and with trembling hands, I placed it in my brother’s casket.
I stood up, took one final look at his face, and then turned and ran out of the church.  Four days.



My back slammed up against the torn screen door and the noisy bang shattered the stillness of the night.  I suppose for a moment the fear showed on my face.  Please don’t wake up old man, I thought.  He would be drunk again tonight, that was for sure.  I pushed the fear aside defiantly and returned to the task at hand…. Mary!  Or was it Carrie?
Anyway…she had wrapped her legs tightly around my waist and her arms were thrown around my neck.  I was trying to balance myself, supporting her weight as she giggled and adorned my face with a volley of kisses.  I silenced her laugh with a fierce kiss of my own to her full, red lips.  We became so lost in the moment of meaningless passion that I didn’t hear the wooden floorboards within the house creak as a pair of footsteps approached the front door.  All of the sudden the door exploded open and knocked me flat on my back.  I lost my hold on the girl and she rolled off the porch and onto the front lawn.  Wiping blood from my nose I looked up to see my Dad’s figure standing in the doorframe.  He was wearing his pajama bottoms and a dirty, torn, tank top.   He looked like hell.  I had gotten used to that look.  Ever since three years ago, when Scott had died, that look had become more prevalent on my Dad’s face.  Standing there, the thing that struck me most were his eyes.  There was madness in those blood-shot eyes. No reasoning with him tonight, he wanted to hurt somebody.  
“Get out of here Mary!” I screamed at the girl.  At this point I couldn’t have cared less what her name was.  She scampered off into the darkness, whimpers fading in the distance, replaced by a sputtering engine as she drove off in her car.  I was alone.  
“What time did I ask you to be home?” my Dad asked testily in his slurred but booming voice.  
“Midnight.”
“And what time is it now?” I didn’t reply.  I had no idea what time it was.  “Dammit, answer me when I ask you a question!”
“I DON’T KNOW!”  All right?  I don’t know what time it is.”
“Don’t you talk to me like that.  I’m still your Dad.”  No you’re not.  Not anymore, I thought, but kept my emotions trapped within.  He grabbed me by my neck and dragged me in the house.  I guess he didn’t want the neighbors to hear him doing whatever he was about to do.  I seriously doubt they would have done anything if they had heard.
“How many times do we have to go through this?  I’m sick and tired of putting up with your disobedience and disrespect.  I tell you to be home at midnight and you come home two hours later with some whore?”  He spat at this.  “When are you gonna learn boy?”  Once again I didn’t answer.  That just made things worse.  “Well, what goes around comes around son, and now it’s time to show you a little disrespect.  Go get my belt.”
This was the part I loved the best.  The lazy bastard wanted me to go get his belt so he could whup my butt.  I got up off the floor and plodded through the door to my father’s room to fetch his belt.  The moon cast just enough light through the old broken windows for me to make my way to the closet.  I had been through this routine so many times, I probably could have closed my eyes and still found the damn belt.  I flung myself on my Dad’s bed and stared up at the ceiling, trying to clear my thoughts.  
What had I been thinking?  I was out all night with some girl that I had only just met the night before.  She was just another face, another body.  This was my fault.  I deserved it.  I got up and went to the closet.  
From the next room Dad roared, “what’s taking so long?”
“Just sharpening the buckle for you Dad,” I joked.  Whups.
“What did you just say?” 
“Nothing Dad.  Couldn’t find your belt.”  He knew darned well what I had said, and I heard his angry footsteps as he made his way across the old wood floor and into the bedroom.  I came out from the closet, belt in hand, and studied his features with a shred of hope.  He used to have a sense of humor.
He snatched the belt out of my hand, then grabbed me by my shirt and flung me on the bed.  So much for hope.  My shirt ripped in the process making his job a whole lot easier.  Out of the corner of my eye I saw him raise the belt, but couldn’t bear to watch the rest.  I buried my face in the mattress as he brought torment crashing down on my bare back.  ‘Crack!’  I suppressed a yell of anguish, and so the only noise was my father’s heavy breathing and the sound of the belt as it cut through the air once again.  ‘Crack!’ Harder this time.  As the belt struck repeatedly across my back, I closed my eyes and dreamed.  Sunshine piercing through rolling gray thunderclouds.   Three days.



When I left, I never looked back.  Maybe I was too afraid of what I might see.  And so I wandered the miles, down endless stretches of dusty country roads, among shadowed mountain valleys, through monotonous wind-blown cornfields, along dirty trash-lined streets.  I slept in gutters, parks, and vacant sheds.  I stole what I needed to get by, and I kept to myself.  Somewhere along the way, I lost my Self.
That’s how I got involved with the drug trade.  That’s how I ended up in jail.
I was new to the city, and my only plan was putting money in my hand.  There’s thousands of kids just like me, all over the city.  Families shattered along with dreams, kids left to plot and scheme.  I was smarter than most, and I found ways to get by.   I made connections everywhere.  I knew kids from Lodo, the ‘Fax.  I did a few favors, scratched a few backs, and eventually I became postman boy for La Raza and one of the largest underground drug trades in the United States.  We’re talking millions and millions of dollars.  Five-oh never suspected that a young white street kid was making deals for a notorious Latin crime ring, so I fit perfectly into the scheme.  Money flowed in and I was lovin’ living.	Until I realized how deep I had gotten.  Once you get involved, you can never go back.  
You can’t unlearn what you see: the tricks of the trade, the hideouts, the cover-ups, the same stern faces that are taped up on police station billboards and broadcast on America’s Most Wanted at night.  I was stuck, and worst of all, I was alone.  As I roamed the city, all I saw was the rich getting richer and the poor going under.  If it wasn’t the pain and suffering I saw each day on the streets, it was the kilos and kilos of drugs that passed from invisible hands into my own, and from my own hands straight to the confused misguided minds of our clients who had given up hope long before me.
China White, Mickey Finn, X, Ice, Soma, STP, Free-Base, Blow, and Speed.  I existed to feed the growing need, a million lost souls slave to the little packages and pills that passed through my hands.  My family became the criminals, the thieves, and the dregs of the earth.  They provided the acceptance I could find nowhere else.  With them I could empathize.  They knew what it was like to look into the eyes of a father who did not love them, to sleep on concrete floors, to scrounge for every meal, to be cast out from society.  They knew it and had been hardened by it like steel forged over a relentless flame.  Eventually, they began to hate.  And I learned to accept this hate, to embrace it, and to unleash it on anyone who sought to stop me.
Two days.


 
The memories came and went like the faint light that passed through the solitary window that adorned my dark cell for a few short hours every day.  The sole joy of my time in the hole was seeing the sun push its way around the rusty window bars to fill my frigid, dark dungeon with a sense of warmth.   One more day.


 	The clanking of keys against the bars reopened the world to my existence.  The groan of thick iron bars was my welcome.  When at last light finally poured into my cramped quarters I was too weak, weary, and blinded to do anything about the tumultuous hatred that had grown and flourished within me.  I was dragged out of the hole, bathed, shaved, and issued a new uniform.  “Welcome back to the land of the living,” one of the guards said dryly.  Along with the new uniform I was ushered to a new wing of the prison where the inmates were none too friendly and security was at a maximum.  My new cell was even dirtier, colder, and more empty than the first.  Angry phrases and lines of base poetry had been carved into the wall among names of prisoners long since released or dead.  I read one.
Empty stares from every cell
Welcome to my living hell
Long time ago I must’ve fell
Guess I’ll drown inside this well.
I shivered as I read the lines that echoed my current sentiments.  Holding rest at bay I read and reread the lines until at last sleep overtook me.
I realized as they sat me down for license plate duty the next day that I had lost my job delivering mail for good.  In fact I had lost pretty much everything.  All I had left in this place was the respect I had earned by beating down a couple crooked cops and keeping my sanity after leaving the hole.  
The license plate factory was an exercise in controlled madness.  All day I sat buried behind stacks and stacks of plates all waiting to be stamped.  For each plate the process was the same.  Grab the plate, line it up, pull the lever, guide the machine down, and pass along the stack.  Then grab a new plate, line it up, pull the lever, guide the machine, pass it along.  I was entranced in my work when a voice shook me from my absent-minded haze.  
“Mike.  Yo Mike!” the voice whispered.  “It’s me, Lewis!”  I looked around me and spotted Lewis a few seats over.  He looked serious, and was waving me over.  “Stop what you’re doin’ a minute.  I need to talk to you!”
It was good to see a familiar face again, and so I glanced around to make sure the guards weren’t watching, then slid over next to him.  “What’s the news?”
“It’s Chris man.”
I swallowed hard, preparing for what I thought was the worst.  “What is it, what happened?  He got busted again already?”  
“No man.  He’s dead.”
I must’ve stared for a long time, paralyzed in disbelief and overwhelming grief.  I buried my face in my hands, refusing to allow tears to win over me.  “Why’d it have to be Pops?  Huh?” I asked, raising my head from my arms.  “What else could go wrong Lewis?  WHAT ELSE!”
By now several of the prisoners had stopped and were staring.  At the back of the room a guard yelled “quiet down over there!”  
I balled my fists and stood.  “My life, Lewis.  What else could go wrong in my stupid MESSED UP life?”
“That’s it  pal,” the guard said, making his way over toward me.  
“I hate my life Lewis,” I said, tensing all my muscles.  I felt insanity surging through my veins, along with the guard’s hand on my shoulder.  I spun, fist raised to compress his face, and the guard flinched nearly stumbling to the ground in reaction.  I stopped my fist inches from his face and then let my arms go limp.  I turned and walked away.
My life seemed to adhere strictly to Murphy’s Law; what ever can go wrong will.  I didn’t know whether to laugh or cry, be glad he moved on or ask God why.  By this time I had pretty much come to the conclusion that there was no God in the sky.  The devil tricked us; that was the worst lie.  There was no use dwelling on it, not even to cry.  And so, stripped of everything that bound me to this world, I began to hate.



There were times I let my hatred build like water boiling on a stove, almost to the point at which it would spill over and scorch everything around it.  I vowed to get back at everyone who had ever helped me find my way into this prison.  Other times I thought about just ending it all, taking my prison linens and hanging myself in the confines of the cell.  Alone at night I would slowly and methodically tie and untie a bedsheet noose, thinking about how worthless it all was.  I might have done it too, if it hadn’t been for Reverend Kelly.  Whatever brought a guy like Mr. Kelly to help out a lowlife dreg of society like me, I’ll never know, but I owe him dearly for it.
“You have a visitor,” the guard told me one morning.  
“You must have the wrong guy,” I said, not looking up.
“Nope, he asked for you.”
“Who is it?” I asked.
“A man of the cloth.”
“A priest?” I scoffed.  “Don’t bother.”
“I’m afraid you don’t have much of a choice,” the guard said, opening my cell.
“Look,” I said, raising my voice.  “I don’t believe in all that religious nonsense and I sure as heck don’t want to talk to some bible-thumping holy roller.”
Grabbing my arm, the guard pulled me out of the cell.  “Come on.”
I was manhandled down to the interrogation quarters, an empty room filled with a long table, a couple fold 
up chairs, and some mirrored glass against one wall.  This ‘man of the cloth’ stood well above six feet; dark skinned and sporting a large gold chain and a jerry curl, definitely not your typical priest.   
Seated across from each we stared at each other for quite some time. The only sound came from the tired buzzing of the dim fluorescent lights above.  I can’t imagine what was running through his mind, but I was damned if I was going to be the first to talk.  Of course, patience has never been one of my virtues…and at last I said simply, “did anyone ever tell you that you look like a struck match?” 
His eyes narrowed and beneath his white-collared uniform his muscles bulged.  Then he erupted into thick, deep laughter.  “Not in so few words,” he said, shaking his head.  A gold-toothed grin remained long after the insult, and at last he said, “did anyone ever tell you that you look like you could use some help?”
“People been telling me that my entire life,” I said, eyes studying the table.  “Hey look mister-”
“Kelly, Leon Kelly.”
“Right.  Mister Kelly, I’m going to save you some time.  I know you want to ‘rescue my soul’ and all, but I ain’t never been big on religion.  If there was a God, he’d a put me out of my misery a long time ago.  You might as well tell those folks to lock me right back up.”
“I’m not asking you to believe in God.  All you gotta believe in is that there’s hope for guys like me and you.”
“Why would I want your help?”
“One, because I’m all you got.  Two, because I’ve helped hundreds of kids just like you get off the street and back on their feet.  And three, well, three because I think I like you,” he said with a wink. 
“You don’t know me.”
The man got a gleam in his eye.  “…I’ve got a feeling.”
“Well, it sounds like a nice sales pitch and all, but if you’re not trying to feed me religion and you don’t expect any payback, what do you want out of the deal?”  
Leon stared at me long and hard, as if he was about to say something immensely important.  “Your promise to do the same for somebody else some day.”
“Look, Leon, I don’t know if you realize this but people are gonna be looking for me when I get out.  I turned states evidence on one of the largest crime organizations in this city.  I stabbed an officer of the law.  You’re wasting your time, even if I could change.”
“You honestly believe that?”
“I don’t know what I believe in anymore.”
“Look Mike, don’t let them get to you like that.  This place can eat at a person until they are completely torn apart, but it doesn’t have to.  It can also change a person, harden them, open up doors to knowledge and clarity they never could find before.  Sometimes when you lose, you win, Mike. 
The phrase seemed familiar.  “…Yeah.  Yeah I’ve heard that somewhere.”  I shook off the thought.  “So you can get me out of here by next review.” 
“I can’t get you out, but I can definitely help you get yourself out.”
I thought about it, sighed, and at long last tossed my hands up in the air.  “Praise Jesus.  Let the healing begin.”
Leon smiled and gripped my arm tightly.  You just did yourself a big favor kid.”  



Later that day in the cafeteria Lewis came up beside me, and for once I was glad to see him.  
“Hey Mike, I’m sorry about Pops.  I hate breakin’ news like that man.”
“You know Lewis, maybe Pops is better off in…wherever he is now, then when he was here, ya know?  I still miss him though.  Damn, only friend I had in this place…besides you.”
“Yeah?  What about that honey down in the infirmary.  Anna?”
“She was something else huh?  They don’t let me gown there anymore now that I’m on the new block and I don’t deliver mail.  Only way I can see her is if I get the crap kicked out of me.”
“You mind if I work my game on her then?” Lewis asked.
“Yeah,” I chuckled.  “Yeah I do mind.  Check this out, I had a visitor today.  Almost two years in this place, nobody visits me.  Then all the sudden this guy shows up.”
“Who was it?”
“Some preacher.  Telling me about how he wants to help me save my soul and this and that.  Kinda almost reminded me of Chris.  
“How’s that?”
“I don’t know, I can’t put my finger on it.  He said something today that Pops told me just before he left.”
“Well shoot man, I’d sell my soul to the devil if it got me outta here.”
I stood and picked up my tray.  “I got license plate duty.  I better go.  I’ll see ‘ya later Lewis.”
“Keep it real man,” Lewis said, slapping me five.



My next meeting with Leon started out much like the first.  We sat in silence until I decided to say something.  And like the first, what I decided to say was intended to make Leon mad.  “So how’d you get sold on this whole religion kick anyway?”  
“Nobody sold me anything.  Religion is free.”
“Is it though?  You are slave to the man upstairs, IF he exists, to an ancient double talking code of ethics that has little bearing on your life, to a methodology that tells you if you give up everything you own that you will gain salvation.  But guess who is the benefactor…the church.  Is that free?”
“Nobody forces me to do what I do.  I love it.  Besides,” Leon leaned in closer and whispered, “I know He exists.”
“Who?”
“God.  The savior.  The man upstairs.  Big sky daddy.  Leon leaned across the table and whispered, “I’ve seen Him.”
I rolled my eyes and exhaled.  “Whoah, pal.  Maybe you need a little time up in the ward, not me huh?” 
“Look kid.  What would you say if I told you there are some things that go on in this world that you can’t even begin to comprehend, yet they happen every day, right before your very eyes?  I’m telling’ you, I’ve seen them.  You think a big brotha like me would join the priesthood any other way?”
“I got to admit that one is kinda strange.  But to tell you the truth Leon, I don’t care.  All I wanna know is, can you get me out of here?”
“Look kid, maybe I made a mistake about you.  You obviously haven’t listened to a god-damn word I’ve said.” 
“Isn’t it against the laws of the Bible to take the Lord’s name in vain?”
Leon stood up, shaking his head.  “Have a nice day Mike.”
“Yeah, peace be with you,” I retorted.
Leon began to walk away, and at the door, he spun and pointed to me in anger.  “Look!  I don’t know if you realize this but I’m all you got.  Ain’t nobody else give a care in the world about your narrow ass.  I’m sorry to break it to you, but without me you’re here for another couple of years.  With me you got a chance to be out in a few months.  I don’t know if you realize this, but I’m all you got.”
I knew he was right and I hated it, but I was too hardheaded to admit my mistake.  “You aren’t the only one Leon.  I got friends.”
“Yeah, who?” 
“Friends in the Family.”
“C’mon kid wake up!  Those guys only care about one thing, makin’ loot.  You were made, you turned states evidence, and everybody in the organization knows it.  No one’s gonna back you.  The first thing you gotta learn if you want to make it on the outside is that there is no future in what you’ve been doing.”
“What do you know about the game old man?  You ever try to make an honest living when nobody gives you a snowball’s chance in hell?  They take one look at your background, your clothes, your slang, and then they send you packing.  I’m from five-points man, ain’t nobody ever rise up from there.  You do what you can to get by, and if somebody gets stepped on in the process, well, that’s how the game is played.”
“Oohhhhh so that’s how the game is played.  Thanks I was wondering.  See, I figured I knew something about it.  I mean, look at these scars, listen to my slang.  Check out the gold-tooth, man.  I been in the game.  I got caught up just like you.  Missed my youth because I spent it in a concrete cell just like the one you’re in now.  But even when everyone said I couldn’t, I made it out.  I changed.  See, the second thing you need to learn is not to play by the rules.  You gotta define your own rules.  Better yet, forget the rules.  Define the truth.  I’ll see you later.”
I instantly saw the mistake I had made.  “Awww, Reverend Kelly, look.  I…I need your help.  I can’t do another two years here.”
Leon Kelly laughed.  “Relax, I said I’ll see you L-A-T-E-R.  Some of us got better things to do than hang out in an eight by six.  And by the way, you damn right you need me.  Don’t forget it,” he said with a wink.  With that he pushed in the rusty old folding chair and started walking down the hallway among the cells.  As his footsteps began to fade away I heard him yell back, “Hey Mike – just remember, there’s no such thing as easy time.”
Those words of advice sounded unmistakably familiar.  I finished the sentence with the words that Chris Wallace had told me.  “Life ain’t easy time.”



I was sitting in my cell in a daze when I heard the familiar squeaking of the old mail cart coming down the line.
“Mike Davis?” the mailman asked, coming into view.	
“Yeah that’s me.”
“Here ya go.”
Through the bars the mailman slipped a fairly large package that I eagerly tore open.  Inside was a stack of notebook paper, a couple cheap pens, stamps, an envelope with my name on it, and a tattered old leather-bound Bible.  I tore open the envelope and removed the letter inside.  It was from Leon, of course, and I read it quietly to myself.
“I’m sure you’d rather have a key to your cellblock, but this is the best I could come up with.  Besides, escape is never the safest plan.  Enclosed is a list of people in the justice department who would be interested in hearing your heartfelt apology, along with the materials needed to write to these people.  The Bible is for your own enrichment.  I’m sure you will find it liberating in its own right –Leon.”
I smiled, and immediately sat down to write.  Never before had I been so driven about anything, but I had my sights set on getting out of that place.  Unfortunately, my drive was much stronger than my skills as a writer, and a couple hours layer I had yet to write anything of worth.  Piles of crumpled up paper had accumulated at the foot of my desk, and I was rubbing my tired eyes.  I set down my pen and laid on my bed, picking up the old Bible that Leon had given me.
I opened to one of several book-marked passages.  It was the book of Job.  At the top of the book, scrawled in faded, handwritten ink, was the message: To live is to suffer.  To survive is to find the meaning in the suffering.
“I’ll be damned,” I said, the words once again striking a familiar chord within me.  “It couldn’t be.”  I shook off the thought and resumed reading the bible.
Why did  I not die in the womb?
Why is not light given to he that is in misery? 	If I speak, my pain will not rest.  If I hold my peace it will not depart.
Anger kills the foolish.  
Nothing upon earth is done without cause.
Teach me, and I will hold my peace.
The words ingrained themselves in my mind, and when I finally set the book down I felt intimately in touch with the feelings that had been trapped within me for so long.  I poured them out onto an empty page of notebook paper, and I did not stop writing until I had finished.  Licking a stamp and slapping it on an envelope, I sealed the letter within and moved on to feverishly writing the next.



I was just finishing my last letter when one of the guards walked up.
“You’re becoming quite the popular guy around here.” 
“Another visitor?” I said looking up.
The guard opened up my cell, but when I stepped out onto the line I was cuffed.
“What the heck?  Why the cuffs,” I said, trying to wriggle free.
“Stand still.”
“Easy!” I said as the cuffs buried into my wrists.
I was escorted down to the interrogation room, but it was empty.  The guard shoved me down in one of the chairs and exited, leaving me to wonder what was going on.  A mechanical buzz rang out down the hallway, and when the doors to the room opened, I saw the silhouette of a figure in a motorized wheelchair coming toward me.  As the chair entered into the light of the room, I followed two pale, atrophied legs up to a large pink scar at the knee cap that disappeared under a pair of old, warn gym shorts.  The shorts met with a wrinkled white t-shirt.  Filling the sleeves of the shirt were two frail arms, grasping the controls of the motorized chair.  At the man’s waist a steel oxygen canister was suspended with two transparent tubes coiling their way up the body to the face.  
Upon recognition of the face, I stood up and stepped back in shock.  The face was a mess of ill-fitting flesh giving way to a cleft lip and a broken nose, one icy blue eye staring at me with hatred, the other glassy, unmoving and unnerving. 
“Oh my God…you’re still alive,” was all I could think to say.   
My mind was filled with images of that ill-fated night in the granary.  Gunshots, a knifeblade, my fingers covered in innocent blood.  Those eyes.
“Mr. Cartwright, do you have anything to say to the prisoner?” the guard said over the loudspeaker.  
In slow, slurred speech the night security guard spoke.  “You’re going straight to hell.”
I tried to speak but could not, and as Mr. Cartwright wheeled himself off, I fell to my knees, holding my stomach.  Unable to hold back the tears that had amassed at my eyelids, I broke down and cried a lifetime’s tears.  I was still weeping as they hauled me to my cell.  



“Good news,” Leon said the next time I saw him.  He could hardly contain his excitement.  I hadn’t seen him for several weeks and I could use some good news.  “You must have written one hell of a letter.  You caught the attention of several key players in The System.  They said they are ‘strongly considering an early release.’  They want you to prove that you’re not all talk though.  They’re going to send some elementary school students through the state pen on one of those ‘scared straight’ programs, you know, at risk kids.  
“Awww, Leon, I’m not so sure about this.  I’ve never been too good with kids.  I’d probably end up saying stupid to ‘em like ‘your father doesn’t love you,’ and you were an accident’ or something like that.”
“You’ll do fine.  Just tell them the same thing you tell me, except don’t be such a smart-ass.”
“And in exchange?”
“Man, why do you always expect something in return?  You are a prisoner.  By all rights you should have no rights.  Isn’t it reward enough to know you might be savin’ some other kid just like you from winding up in this dump?  In exchange you will be in the good graces of the justice department, alright?”
“I can tell these kids whatever I want?”
Leon nodded.  “Keep it clean and stick to the topic.”
“Alright, I can handle that.”
“You’ve handled an abusive pops, your mom leaving, two years of prison.  You better be able to handle a few little kids.”
“Wait a minute.  What did you just say?”
“I said you better be able to handle a few little kids.”
“No, before that.  You said something about my Mom and Dad.  Leon, I never told you about my Mom and Dad.”
“It was in your file.”
“No, bullshit.  There ain’t no file on my abusive Pops.  Something’s going on.  You keep saying all this stuff that I’ve heard before, and then the other night I read this quote in the Bible you gave me.”
“Mike, do you believe in Heaven and Hell?”
“Yeah…I think I do.  Yeah.”
“Well what if I told you there was something else, besides Heaven and Hell?  What if I told you that sometimes ex-cons like you and me get another chance?”
“You mean like being pardoned?” I asked.
“I mean like reincarnation,” Leon said in a muted tone.
“Whoah, Leon, slow down.  You’re not saying that-“
Leon was shaking his head.
“No, that’s impossible.  Chris put you up to this.  He’s still alive isn’t he?”
“Mike,” Leon said gently, “you can believe whatever makes sense to you.  The important thing is the message, not the messenger.  Just know this: you can be stripped of everything in life but hope.  No once can ever take that because it is yours.  Don’t give it up.  You never know when you might get another chance.”
I was shaking my head in disbelief.  “You’re Chris.  You’re Pops aren’t you?  Jesus.  I don’t believe it.”  
Leon put a heavy hand on my shoulder to calm me.  “It doesn’t have to make sense Mike.”
There was a long period of silence as I struggled with a concept utterly foreign to me.  At last, when I spoke, it wasn’t about Pops.  “Is Mr. Cartwright going to die Leon?”
“Everyone dies Mike.”
“I know, I know, but what I mean is, do you think he will die soon…because of me?”
“Honestly?” Leon sighed.  “The only thing keeping him alive is all that medical crap they hooked him up to, and I suspect even that won’t keep him long.  Yes, I suppose he’ll die sometime soon.”
“And it will be all my fault, won’t it?”
“Yeah.  Yeah it will.  You are responsible for the pain that he and his family have suffered every night for the past two years.  But who knows how the decisions we make in life will affect us?  If you hadn’t chosen the path you did, you might be dead yourself.”
“I prayed for him last night.  Never prayed for anbody before…what’s it like Leon?  Death?”
“You ever hear about the light at the end of the tunnel?”
“Once.  I was getting certified as an EMT, they brought this guy into the ER and he was dead, heart attack.  He had some kids, real young, and a pretty wife.  They were terrified and they started praying.  The doctors, they shocked him three times and he finally came around.  He had been dead for five minutes.  When they stabilized him he was going on and on about a light and a tunnel.”
“Some folks say it’s the gateway to salvation, they see family members urging them onward, familiar voices greeting them into the afterlife.  Pure bliss.  Some say.”
“It’s a nice thought,” I mused.  
“Others say the light is a deception, a trick of the devil.  Immersed in the light, they claim that the darkness of death which is hidden from us in life is finally revealed.
“What do you think?”
“I think that if you’ve lived a good life then you won’t have to worry about what is on the other side.”
“If that’s the case, I’m in trouble.”
“You got time kid.  There’s always time.”
“Thanks for bringing Mr. Cartwright in,” I said, switching the subject.  “It hurt man, hurt more than anything I’ve ever felt to face up to my problems like that.  But I don’t know, it helped.  Lot of skeletons in the closet, you could say.”
Leon nodded knowingly.  “Catharsis,” he said.
“Excuse me?”
“It’s called Catharsis.  The ancient Greeks believed that in order to cleanse the soul, one had to confront the cause of his suffering.  I’m glad you got something out of it, because I brought you another guest.”
I swallowed.  “Who is it this time?  The kid I beat up in fifth grade and stole his lunch money?”
“No, nothing like that.  I think you’ll actually like this one.  Anna!” he yelled.
I couldn’t help but smile as Anna appeared in the doorway.
I stood up.  “God are you a sight for sore eyes.”
We embraced tightly and I held her back to have a good look at her.
“I imagine those eyes can get pretty sore after two years in the clink.  It’s good to see you.”
I glanced sharply at Leon.
“Oh, oh right,” Leon said awkwardly.  “I uh, I’ll just leave you two alone for a bit.”
“Did you hear the news?  I’m gonna be out of here soon.”
“That’s great Mike.  This place doesn’t suit you.  Hey, I want to help you out.  I was thinking maybe I could get you a job on an ambulance crew.  You still remember all those EMT skills?”
“I don’t know,” I said grinning slyly.  “Let’s perform a patient assessment and find out.”  I ran my hand down Anna’s arm and she responded by slipping away and slapping me playfully.
“You know they watch all this right?”
“Let’s give them a show.”
Anna blushed.  “Mike, I want you to know that I’m here for you.  I-“
The loudspeaker crackled.  “Times up.”
“I’ll talk to you soon,” Anna said.  
“Promise?”
“You’re stuck with me.” 




I sat in the interrogation room in front of thirty young pairs of eyes, brimming with wonderment, fascination, and intimidation.  Little did they know I was about as nervous as they were.  I was really starting to get skeptical about this whole idea.  For one, most of these kids had seen jail before, grown up with it, gone and visited daddy in the slammer every Friday.  For them, jail was a normal part of every day life.  For another, what could I tell these kids?  Don’t go broke.  Don’t deal crack.  Don’t let your dad beat up on you and don’t let your family members die.  And if you do end up here, don’t ever drop the soap.  I tried to look scary but I don’t think it was working too well.  At length a chubby kid in the front row raised his hand.
“Hey mister, are you one of those crazy mass murderer guys that cuts off people’s fingers and sticks them up the noses of your victim’s decapitated heads and eats their toes with jelly and syrup?”
“You watch too much TV kid.”
Another hand shot up.  “Have you ever been on that show America’s Most Dangerous Criminals?”
“Not yet.”
“Is it true they make you eat only bread and water?”
“Worse.  I don’t even know what it is we eat but it smells like poop and it tastes like, well, kinda like poop.”
“Haha!  You eat poop!  Poop-eater, poop-eater” the kids started chanting.
“Very funny.  Be quiet.  Be QUIET, SHUT UP!” I yelled, slamming my cuffs on the table.  The kids finally shut their mouths and sat up straight, staring at me in wide-eyed fear.  “Now, listen,” I said, voice softening.  “I’m not crazy, I’m not one of America’s Most Dangerous Criminals.  All I am is a guy who made some pretty dumb choices as a kid, kinda like you guys.  The difference between you and me is, I didn’t learn from my mistakes.  You guys can.  But you gotta listen.  Prison is not a fun place.  Most nights I can’t even sleep.  Most meals I can’t even eat.  Everybody in here wants to beat me up, even the guards.  I work all day in a license plate factory for no pay, and I live in a cell just big enough to fit my bed and a toilet.  Sometimes I wish I was a kid again because then I could do it all over and not screw up.
“Now you guys are a lot like me.  If you keep screwing up you’ll end up in here, or even worse, dead.  But you still got a chance.  This is what you have to do.  First, pay attention in school, even if your teachers are idiots.  I know mine were.  Second, find something you love to do and do it until you are really good.  You-“ I said, pointing to a kid in the crowd.  “What do you like to do?  What’s your favorite thing to do when you’re bored?”
“Beat up my little brother,” he said, to the spastic laughter of the class.
“Okay…well, we probably want to stay away from violence.  Anything else?  Something that you can do that no one else can do?”  
The kid wrinkled his brow and squinted, thinking hard.  “Ummm, I eat live grasshoppers!  None of my friends can do that.”
“Wow,” I said, caught off guard.  “That’s, uh…yeah.  How about you?” I said, pointing to the most innocent looking kid and crossing my fingers.
“I like to draw.”
“See, there ya go.  Whatever anybody says or thinks about you, at least you know you’re a good artist.  Don’t ever give up drawing.  Maybe you can be a famous artist some day.”
“What are you good at mister?” the chubby kid in the front asked.  
“I’ve always been good at helping sick people.”
“I have asthma can you help me?” a little girl asked.
“Did they give you an inhaler?”
“Yes.”
“Do you have it with you?”
“Yes.”
“Do you know how to use it?”
“Yes.”
“Show me.”
The girl took out her inhaler from the backpack and sprayed it in her mouth.  
“Maybe I can help you kid.  Let me see that thing.”  I held out my cuffed hands and took the inhaler.  I looked it over and noticed that the medicine was out of date, but probably still ok.  “Alright,” I said, positioning the inhaler between my hands.  “Whoever gave you this thing obviously never told you how to use it right.  Here, come up here.”
The girl was hesitant at first but her friends finally pushed her up near me.  “Okay, I’m going to say go, and when I do I want you to breathe out all your air.  Then I’m going to count to three and on three, take a deep breath in, okay?”
The girl nodded.  “Alright, go.  One…two…three.”  The girl exhaled loudly and as she breathed in, I sprayed the inhaler into her mouth and watched as the mist disappeared in her throat.  She gave a little cough.
“Woah!  That feels funny.”
“That’s the medicine working, see.  That’s how you need to do it every time.”
“Thanks mister,” she said with a gap-toothed grin.  Then she leaned over and whispered in my ear, “You’re not so scary really.”
“Thanks kiddo.  Just don’t tell these guys that.”  
I answered some more questions and talked to the kids until the instructor told them it was time to leave.  They left in a noisy swarm, and I returned to my own cell feeling pretty good.



“Do you have anything to say on your behalf, Mr. Davis?” a woman asked from behind thick-rimmed glasses.  She sat amidst a panel of stern-looking suits, all scribbling notes as I responded to their pointed, formal and dry questions.  Finally it was my chance to speak, and I had no idea what to say.  This was my one chance to prove myself worthy of release, and here I was speechless.  I sat in silence for a moment, trying to calm myself down.
“Mr. Davis?  Do you have anything you would like to tell us?”
Calm down, I thought.  Tell them what’s on your mind.  “Yeah.  Uh…yeah, I do.  In the time I’ve spent here I’ve seen sights so grim I’d swear I was in hell right now, except I’m not dead.  I’ve seen to the darkest depths this life can offer.  I’ve been bloodied, broken, berated; I’ve been stuck in a hole no bigger than a closet and left in absolute darkness with nothing but my miserable thoughts to keep me company.  I’ve sent three prison guards to the hospital and I’ve been put in the infirmary four times.”
“Mr. Davis, maybe you misunderstood the question.  Do you have anything to say that would improve your standing in these-“
“I understood the question just fine…with all due respect.  Let me finish.   In the time I’ve spent here, I’ve also experienced happiness and a sense of self worth greater than I ever felt on the outside.  At times I wondered if I ever wanted to leave.  I met a few of the most amazing folks of my life in this place, one of them is dead, one of them so precious I don’t know how I could ever convince her that I’m worth a moment of her time, and one of them who you have been in contact with, Mr. Kelly.  These folks are the family and friends I never had growing up.  They keep telling me that I am worth a damn, and maybe I do have a shot to make something out of myself.  And you know what?  I’m starting to believe them.  
“The other day this group of kids came to visit the pen and this little girl, god she was the cutest thing but real sick, coughing and gasping, she ask me if I could help her feel better.  And you know what, I did help her, and I really felt like I had a purpose, like for once in my life I was headed in the right direction instead of just deeper into the fog, you know?   
I don’t know what you guys are thinking, or what you keep scribbling on those notepads of yours, I don’t even know if I’d give myself a second chance after what I’ve done, but I’ll tell you this.  When I do make it out of here, assuming I don’t get shot down in the streets on release, I’m gonna do things different, real different, because you never know when it’s your time to go, you know?”



“Here are your things Mister Davis.”  The guard handed me my wallet, watch, keys, cell phone, a gold chain with a cross on it.   I was dressed in a fancy new suit that Leon had given me, and I felt like a new man.
“You can keep this stuff,” I said, handing back all of the items but the necklace, which I slipped into my pocket.  “This is all I need.”
“Thank you for visiting the state pen, we hope you’ve enjoyed your stay,” the guard cracked, thrusting open the thick iron doors that had successfully withheld me from the outside world for the last three years of my life.”
“More than you know,” I said with a lopsided grin.
I stepped beyond the confines of the prison and took a deep breath of thick, fresh air.  I had almost forgotten what it smelled like, and I sure as heck had never appreciated it so much as now.  Maybe the deeds of my past life hadn’t been forgotten, but at least now I felt like maybe they could be forgiven.  
Waiting to greet me at the outer gates was Leon, gold teeth gleaming in a crooked grin.  
“Cripes, Leon, you look happier than I do,” I said as I stood before him.  He scooped me up in a big bear hug.  
“You’re a free man!” he cheered.  “And lookin’ darn smooth I might add.”
“Yeah, thanks for the suit Leon.  And thanks for stickin’ around.  I figured you thought your work was done with me.”
“My work is done.  Rest is up to you.  But that doesn’t mean I don’t like to spend time with you.  You’re always challenging me…and complimenting me on my good looks,” he joked.  
“Only thing missing is Anna.  I was kinda hoping she’d pay me a visit.”
“Oh, that reminds me.  She pulled some major strings for you down at Central.  Ordinarily nobody in their right mind would put an ex-con on a rig, it’s against the law.  But she put her ass on the line for you.” 	“And?”
“And we got you on with St. Anthony’s Ambulance Service.  You start tomorrow.  If you really know as much as I hear, I’m guessin’ you’ll move through the ranks pretty fast.”
“Leon, are you serious?  That’s amazing!”  I slapped Leon’s shoulder.  “I owe you my life.”
“You don’t owe me nothing.  You owe it to yourself.  I’m proud of you.”



“St. Anthony’s Central is a level one trauma center,” the charge nurse explained as we rushed around through the hospital in a futile attempt at crash course training.   “We cover more ground than any other hospital in the state.  If it can happen to somebody, you’ll see it here at Central.  That’s why you need to pay strict attention to standard operating procedure.  “You’ll be staffed on an ALS unit, but you don’t attempt to go beyond your scope of practice, you hear?  You try to intubate, IV, administer meds – you’re gone.  Understood?  Good, now you’ll be doing twelve-hour shifts to start.  If you get hired on, that goes up anywhere from twenty-four to forty-eight hours.  You’ll be working Five Points and North Metro.  Are you familiar with that area?”
I chuckled.  “Oh yeah.  I know every street corner and deserted alley in the region.”
“Outstanding.  You have any questions, you call medical control.  If you don’t document it, it wasn’t performed.  Oh, and St. Anthony’s also has the highest burnout rate in the state, so try to keep your sanity…good luck!” and with that I was left standing on the ambulance dock.  No sooner had she left then another man popped up right in front of me.  
“Hey, I’m Greg.  You’ll be working on my rig.  So…good luck, stay calm, and uh, brace yourself.”
Twelve hours in an ambulance at a level one trauma center passes like a hazy dream.  The last five hours had been a blur of screams, tears, blood, sirens, shouting and wreckage.  I was glad to be in action, doing something honest and worthwhile.  The pay was terrible, the work was excruciating, and the risks were incredible, but to me it didn’t matter.  Each bead of sweat was like medicine, purging my soul of countless years of hate, fear, paranoia, guilt, envy, and confusion.  Everything felt perfect.
We were cruising down federal Code 3 en route to a construction accident when that feeling vanished, replaced by a sudden stabbing pain in my stomach that made me double over in agony.  My coworker noticed.  “You alright man?”
“Yeah I think so,” I said, feeling the pain subside as quickly as it had come.  But for some reason I was left with a shallow feeling deep down inside.  As an EMT we are taught that when a patient tells you he believes he is going to die, you should take those words very seriously.  It’s called an impending feeling of doom.  For some reason, what I felt was doom, if only for a few seconds. I didn’t say anything, but it scared me half to death.  
The ambulance came to a halt at the base of the Flatirons Crossing, a new mall that was being built on the north end of town.  From the back of the ambulance I could see a bunch of workers huddled around a twisted mesh of iron and concrete.  As we stepped out, one of the men rushed over, breathing heavily.  His eyes were red and frenzied. 
“It’s Ricky.  He’s…he’s messed up real good.”
“Where is he, where’s Ricky?” the paramedic asked.  
“He’s over there, in that mess.”  The paramedic scurried over to the scene of the accident.
“What happened?” I asked.
“Ah…I don’t know man,” the guy said, shaking his head in distress.  “Somebody didn’t cinch it up right, the whole retaining wall fell down on top of him.  He’s pinned.”
“We’re gonna need some hi-flow O, get me morphine and a 14, would you?” Greg ordered.  I fumbled around in the jump kit and brought out the things he needed.  When I knelt down to hand them to him, I could see were a few limbs hanging out from underneath the retaining wall.  I peered in.
What I saw was a man whose chest had been compressed like an old pop can.  Everything within had surely been destroyed.  A few cracked ribs protruded from his side, he lay in a pool of blood, and his breaths were very shallow and noisy, suggesting a collapsed lung.  When Ricky saw us, he started screaming maniacally.  
“God!” he bellowed, his voice watery and frail.  “Don’t let me die!  We just lost our son a year ago.  My…wife-“  
“Ricky we’re gonna do everything in our power to help you out, okay?  Now what I need you to do is take this,” I said, putting an oxygen mask over his face.  Just behind me Greg was starting the IV.  I turned on the oxygen and let it flow, then reached among the rebar to try to find some vitals.
“What are we doing to get this thing off of him?” my partner yelled over his shoulder.”
“We’re hooking up the crane right now,” a voice said from outside of the debris.”
“Go get the backboard,” Greg ordered.  I scrambled off and returned with the board, immediately preparing to strap Ricky down.
“Alright Ricky you’re going to start feeling a little better.  You let me know in a couple minutes if the pain is better or worse, okay?  Meantime we’re going to try and get this stuff off of you.”  Greg’s words didn’t lend much assurance, and I swallowed hard, knowing his chance for survival was slim.  I felt for a pulse and barely found one, thin and thready.  
Minutes later we found ourselves en route to Saint Anthony’s, sirens blazing, the back of the ambulance a blur of hands and fingers rushing back and forth with equipment.  I spared a split second to glance up at the EKG and saw the heart rate slowly dropping as Ricky slipped into decompensated shock.  Halfway home he flatlined.  
We responded by slapping the shock pads on his mangled chest and side, sending electricity flowing through his now lifeless body.  The heart rhythm was analyzed and we shocked again.  Nothing.  “Again,” Greg ordered. Nothing.  “Alright, CPR, let’s go.”
As I bent over Ricky’s face to begin CPR his eyelids burst open and his hands shot to the mask over his face.  He fumbled with it for a second and then ripped it off, tossing it across the room.  With huge, terrified eyes he stared at me and said weakly, “you…you’re next.”  The eyes shut as rapidly as they had opened and the EKG leveled out once again.  I stood frozen at what I had just heard.
“C’mon man, give him a breath,” Greg said expectantly.  



Ricky died at our hands, just minutes from the hospital.  That night in debriefing we all sat quietly, not really sure how to bring up the day’s events.  Finally someone broke the silence.  “Six million ways to die…that’s got to be about the most god-awful way I’ve ever seen.”
“Oh Jesus Billy!” a few people responded in unison. 
I shook my head, still trying to rearrange my thoughts.  “I just don’t understand it.”
“What don’t you understand.”
“Why did he say I was next?”
“Uh…what do you mean?”
“In the Ambulance, right before he flatlined the second time.  He said I was next.”
Silence.  Then, “you’ve had a long day.  Maybe you should call it a night, get some rest.”
“Ahhh…tell me you heard it?  Somebody heard it!” I said, eyes bouncing from face to bewildered face.
“You know what I do to deal with a core?” Billy asked in his Texas drawl, changing the subject.
“No Billy!  Not again,” everyone shouted in unison.  
“What?  What?”
“Let’s hear it,” I asked with rising curiosity.  
Greg frowned, then said, “alright, alright, go ahead Billy.”
“Awhile back, when I was training with West Metro, we got called to this neighborhood diner.  Female, age 32, type I diabetic.  We go in the place and this woman is freakin’ out, knocking things off tables, gasping for breath.  The patrons are all staring, bewildered, and the husband is trying to calm her down.  Next thing you know she passes out on the table.  She’s going into insulin shock, needs sugar bad.”
“Right.”
“Now everybody knows you can’t give oral glucose to a patient who is unconscious, right?”
“Right.”
“And everybody knows honey is a great source of glucose, right?”
“Sure.  Calms the stomach, absorbs fast, potent.”
“Well my instructor, not the most reserved fella in the world, he sends me to get some honey because he knows he’s gotta do something fast.  I came back with one of them honey bear containers and he grabbed it from me.  Next thing you know, boss turns the lady over, flips up her skirt, pulls down her underpants, and shoves that honey bear right up her ass.”
Rowdy laughter filled the room.  When my own had subsided I said, “you guys got a sick sense of humor, you know that?  So what happened?”
“I’ll be buggered if he didn’t save her life.  She shot right back awake within a minute, wondering why she was half naked and her butt was all sticky.  Nearly gave the folks at the next table a heart attack, but hey.  Now every time I see somethin’ out there that scares me, I think of that little honey bear, after that it’s hard to take anything seriously.”
I chuckled softly.  “It’s funny, the things we do to cling to our stupid, magnificent little lives.  What is it about death?  People aren’t ever happy with their life the way it is, but they’re scared out of their minds to let go.”  My question was left unanswered, even in my own mind.  At length I said, “well Billy, I’ll remember that.  Thanks.” 	 
Delirious from tired, I trudged out of the debriefing room rubbing the sleep from my eyes.  I bid farewell to the crew, packed away my gear, and caught the next elevator down to the emergency room entrance.  When the elevator doors slid open I saw Anna in the waiting room reading.  Sneaking quietly across the tile floor, I snuck up behind her and covered her eyes with my hands.  “Guess who?” I said, trying my best to disguise my voice.
“Rob!  Oh, Rob it’s you!” she said enthusiastically. 
“Rob?” I said, unmasking my voice and allowing my hands to drop disappointedly.  
“Just kidding Mikey, I knew it was you.  Who do you think I came here to see?”  Anna turned around and gave me a big hug.  
“What are you doing here?”
“I came to give you a ride home.”
“Aren’t you sweet.  But you didn’t have to do that.  I can take care of myself.”
“Oh yeah?  Then why are you trying so hard to get me?”
“Because you’re so beautiful.”
Anna blushed, then kissed me softly on the cheek.
“C’mon, let’s go.”  She put her arm in mine and we put the hospital behind us, heading for the parking garage.
“Why don’t we go to your place?” I suggested.
“And why would we do that?” Anna said, dropping my arm affronted.  
“Because we can’t make love in a church,”
“What makes you think we’re making love tonight?  You’re sleeping alone tonight pal.  Look, don’t take this wrong Mike, but I hardly even know you.  I just enjoy spending time with you, that’s it.”
“Well you sure have a funny way of showing it.”
“Hey, I’m just trying to make you feel better.  I just want to help you out.”
“Look, Anna, you helped me out.  Okay, you got me on with St. Anthony’s.  I’m in your debt.  But that is it.  I don’t need any more help from anybody.  I don’t need a savior.”
“I know, Mike, but how do I know you won’t do something like that again.  I mean, you fly off the handle every time we’re together.”
“I made some stupid mistakes in the past.  I admit it.  I screwed up.  But I paid for it Anna.  For two miserable years I paid for it.  Why can’t we just leave the past behind us?”  Anna just sighed.  I rubbed my temples.  “Look, I’m just gonna catch the bus home.”  I started walking away.
“Oh come on, Mike.  Don’t be stubborn.  My car’s right here.”
“I’m taking the bus.”
“Look, I came all this way.”
“Maybe you shouldn’t have,” I shouted over my shoulder, increasing the distance between us and ignoring her plea.  A thousand mixed emotions trounced through my mind as I sat down on the bus stop bench under the wan, flickering corner lamp.  I was furiously regretful, regretfully sad, sadly confused.  I was so preoccupied with the sudden onslaught of emotions that I didn’t even notice the jet black Lexus creeping up on me from around the corner until it was too late.
From the thirty-five percent tints emerged two silencer-equipped barrels whose bullets bore my name.  It was La Familia no doubt, my old drug running buddies coming to collect their dues.  They would not bargain, would not accept apologies, and would not rest until my cold, lifeless body was pronounced dead by the coroner.
When I finally caught the car out of the corner of my eye, I sprang up from my seat and turned to dive over the bench.  The first bullet burst from the barrel and buried itself in the bench right where I had been standing, sending wood splinters everywhere.  The second shot did not miss.  I felt a sudden stabbing feeling in my back and chest and heard the cracking of ribs as the bullet burrowed its way into my body like an angry snake, thrashing and tumbling within me.  I tripped over the top of the bench and smashed my head on the concrete below, blood gushing from the wound as it pried open.  My body went limp and I gasped for air, each breath feeling as if it might be the last.  My vision blurred and doubled and went black, then repeated the cycle.
Despite the ringing that echoed in my ears, I could hear the car speed off along with a blood curdling feminine scream.  Seconds later Anna’s beautiful face appeared above me.  For a moment I could have sworn she was an angel.  Her trembling fingers clutched my wounds as she screamed for help, yet none came.  She caressed my face and I tried to smile but couldn’t summon the strength.  All of the sudden everything went silent and all I could hear was the faint beating of my dying heart.  Time slowed to a snail’s pace, and I could see Anna mouth the words “I love you.”
As the tears poured from her eyes and splashed down upon my face, I saw the specter of death standing over her shoulder, faintly at first, then stronger and stronger until it became solid and distinct.  A pitch-black shroud encasing two hollow eyes that stared at me vacantly.  It approached, passing through Anna’s body to within inches of my face.  I tore at the creature’s robes in shear terror, but Death seemed unaffected.
In the face of my demise, I realized the struggle was inevitable and released my grasp on all that bound me to the Earth.  My grip loosened from the robes and fell to my side and with that Death reached a bony hand into my chest and squeezed tight my heart.  The beating that filled my ears slowed to a halt and with that, everything went black.



Part 3

Once again surrounded by the dark, posthumous madness, I looked around for a sign of, well anything.  Gone were the rotting corpses wandering aimlessly about.  Gone was the pool of reflections that had forced me to confront my past.  What could be left for me now?  I had seen my entire life flash before my very eyes, right up until the moment of my death.  Was this to be my fate?  To search aimlessly through a darkness blacker than my memories?  
I looked around in all directions, numerous times, and at last I saw the sign of something in the distance.  It was a brilliant gleam of light, casting its rays recklessly into the eternal night, and I began trudging toward it.  Standing at last beneath it I could not believe my eyes.  I stood before a long, narrow, earthen tunnel that inclined steeply towards the brilliant light.  The glow, warm and inviting and faintly blue in color, seemed to call me toward the source, as if to promise safety, comfort, and even the possibility of salvation.  Leon’s voice called aloud in my mind.“You ever hear of the light at the end of the tunnel?  Some say it is the gateway to salvation.  Others say that the light is a deception.  A trick of the devil.”
I started to walk upwards, then stopped suddenly.  Perhaps the light with which I was confronted was the light of truth, for the realization that spawned in my mind was clearer and more frightening than any I had ever experienced before.  This could not be salvation.  All my life I had been evil, pure evil.  I did not deserve Heaven.  
Yet something within me begged, pleaded me to bathe in its glow.  I started up the narrow, rocky passageway, knees and palms cutting and bruising as I ascended.  Nearer to the light I began to hear a thin, raspy whisper wafting toward me.  Michael.  Don’t be afraid.  The words burned in my mind as I stepped to within inches of the source of radiance.  Although piercingly bright, the light did not hurt my eyes as I peered into it, searching for some clue as to what lay beyond. Nothing was revealed but urgency.  Hurry.  
My mind tossed back and forth between plunging into the light and making a hasty retreat.  Leon’s voice filled my ears.  What if I told you there was something else, besides Heaven and Hell.  
On that thought I spun away from the light and plunged back down the tunnel, pursued by tormented screams that increased steadily in volume, sending tremors cascading through the tunnel, knocking free debris that threatened to crush me as I scrambled toward safety.  Ears ringing, tunnel walls collapsing, I made one last ditch attempt at self-preservation.  Summoning every ounce of my steadily declining strength I leapt for the mouth of the tunnel.



I awoke from my delirium to the sight of a motionless heart monitor beeping loudly to indicate absence of heart rhythm.  I looked around me and saw the hospital room where I had passed away.  Had I passed away?  I felt stronger and more alive than I had ever felt before.  I was acutely aware of even the slightest motion or noise.  I could feel the doctors breathe across the room, I could hear them swallow as they stared down at me, grim faced and heads shaking.  I could smell their fear and see their knuckles whiten with tension.  I could taste the bitter, stale flavor of death.  I rose up and looked down on my body, strapped down and wired up, blood bathed and riddled full of holes. At that moment I knew that I no longer belonged to this body.  I was…something else.  As the medical team unplugged the EKG and began disconnecting the IV and oxygen tubes, I rose up to my feet and stared at my decrepit former shell.  Good riddance, I thought.  My eyes turned to Anna, who was weeping uncontrollably, the sound was almost deafening.  White knuckles clutched handfuls of the bed sheet that lay blood-soaked beneath me.  The medical staff pulled her kicking and screaming away from the bed.  In the restraints of one of the surgeons, all she could do is look at my corpse and mutter, “I’m sorry I’m sorry I’m sorry.” 
As the doctors wheeled away my lifeless body, I moved to stand beside Anna.  I reached out to run my fingers through her hair but when I tried, they passed through as if she was nothing more than a figment of my imagination.  I longed to massage her neck or kiss her cheek or hear warm laughter, yet I could only sit and watch her suffer.  It was then that the madness of my situation hit me…I was a timeless observer, like God himself only powerless to control my situation and far from omniscient.  No one worshipped my name.  They wouldn’t even remember my face at my funeral.  No Heaven for me.  No Hell either.  Just time, passing like drips of water from a leaky faucet.  So much time…
The team of Doctors returned and placed arms around Anna, averting her bewildered and unbelieving gaze from the burgundy tinted floor where I had passed away.  
“You have to go,” they urged her.  She nodded, wiping tears from her bloodshot eyes.   
“I love you Mike,” she sniffed, and then ran from the room.
“I love you Anna,” I called after her.
The hospital staff seemed unaware of my presence.  I walked up to within inches of the lead surgeon’s face and he did not flinch.  I exhaled heavily, releasing an icy cloud of breath.  There seemed to be no reaction from the doctor…or was there a slight shiver?  He walked forward, through me, to assist with ER cleanup.  Looking above me I found myself staring into the overhead surgeon’s mirror yet no reflection of me played across its surface.  For all practical purposes, I was invisible and absent, free to do as I pleased.  With that in mind, I walked through the wall into the next room where doctors were performing open-heart surgery on an elderly man.  
At the edge of the table in a vacant rotating stool I saw a skeleton.  I looked away in disbelief and glanced back, but it was still sitting there.  The rickety assembly of bones and tendons became animated, looking up to view my shocked expression and motioned me to leave with outstretched fingers.  I averted my gaze to the corner of the room where I saw another peculiarity - the shadow of a man yet with no physical object to attach itself too.  It rose up and shrugged, and then a voice emitted from its general direction.
“What?  You thought you were the only one?”
“…only one what?”
“You tell me?”
“Tell you what?”
“What do you think you are?”
“I don’t think I’m anything, I-“
“You have to be something.  Everything is something.  Even something that is dead.”
“I am dead, right?”
“You saw your body.”
“How do you know?”
“Because I’ve been watching you.  I am the one that killed you.”
“What are you talking about?  I was shot.”
“And I am the one that silenced your clamorous heart.  It was still so strong…but hey, I guess you can’t pick your time to go, right?  But I must admit, I never thought I’d see you back here.”  
“Where am I?”
“The hospital.  You should know, you worked here…for a day.”
“What about Heaven…and Hell?”
“It’s best not to think about those things.”  
“Why did you stop my heart?”
“That’s what I do.  What we do, I should say.”
“What?  What do we do, what are we?  Ghosts?”
“No.  Well, yes and no.  More than ghosts.  Angels.”
“So where’s your halo?  Your wings?  Matter of fact, where’s your face?”
The shadow cackled.  “You spent too much time in Bible school.”
“Well…what else can I base things on?”
“Look, you and I, we’re different kinds of angels.  Fallen angels, you might say, only not so demonic as your Bible would make us sound.  We’re angels of death.”
“So that skeleton?”  
“An Angel of death as well.  We choose our own appearance in the subconscious of our dying minds, which doesn’t really matter because we can never see ourselves.  Like I said, you’re not the only one.  Oh we’re rare, there’s no doubt about that.  We are the select few, chosen to roam the earth eternally, bringing death to those whose time it is to ‘shuffle off this mortal coil’ as it were.”
“Did you say eternally?”
“Till the end of time my friend.  Day in, day out, we are surrounded by our victim’s silent screams, attuned to their ever-gasping breath and frantic, convoluted thought.  You open the morning paper and read about a woman who was brutally murdered, the killer never found?  That’s me.  You walk down a desolate alleyway in the chill of the night…it’s my footsteps you hear.  It is my voice that haunts dreams and my face that is seen in one’s last miserable breaths.  I am the vengeful wrath of death.”
“And I am…you?”
“We are of the same brood, yes.”
“How do I talk to them?”
“Who?”
“The living.”
“You don’t,” the shadow said firmly.  “You don’t talk to them you don’t follow them, you don’t think about them.  Your only job is to kill them.”
“Why me?”
“You tell me.”
“I don’t know.  All I know is I don’t deserve to go to Heaven…but I don’t want to be in Hell.”
The devil laughed.  “You ran.  From the light.  You felt deception, no?”
“I guess so.”
“Well there you have it.  That’s why you are here.  You truly are master of your own destiny it seems.”
“What do I do now?”
“You kill.  You know what that’s like don’t you?  The officer…Cartwright I believe his name was.”
“He died didn’t he?”
“Oh yes; not two days after you saw him in prison. It was his corpse, his eyes that you saw in your dream.”
“How do you know what I saw in my dream?”
“Details, details.  You’ll learn in due time, I hope.  I’ll tell you what you do need to know, how about that?  Your home will be the dark alley, the cliff’s edge.  At the end of every gun barrel and knife blade you will wait.  Day and night you will bear witness to the fading dusk of life, and it will be your job to bring forth nightfall.”
“You mean I gotta-“
“You gotta squeeze every ounce of life from their still-beating hearts!”
“And if I don’t?”
“You do.”
“but what if I-“
“You DO.”
“So how do I know-“
“Don’t worry.  You will know who and when and where.  With any luck, you’ll even learn why.  The How, well, that’s up to you.  Free will is a wonderful thing.  Speaking of death, I have a car wreck to attend to.  Happy hunting.”  The shadow sprung from its seated position and leapt up onto the windowsill.  “Oh, and try to move a little quieter.”  Before I could say another word, the shadow had plunged from the window ledge like a black wind, leaving me in awe and confusion.  With no further guidance or explanation, I was left free to roam.  


Roving through the hospital I saw dozens of ghosts, wraiths, and specters of the spirit world, all waiting patiently by bedsides for their moment to steal the precious life held within the fragile bodies of their victims.  They came in all forms, some so ghastly as to be unmentionable, some so ordinary it was hard to tell them apart from a human being, except that I could feel the absence of life within them.  My attempts to converse with them were met with vacuous stares and impatient dismissals.  At last, frustrated, hurt, and confused, I slipped silently from the hospital and into the stillness of the early morning.  
I felt as much a stranger to this Earth as I had before my death, if not more.  With nowhere to go I headed back toward my old neighborhood.  As I plodded home along the lamp-lit streets I suddenly heard voices and childish laughter from within one of the houses.  I turned my head to look through the cloudy window of an old, run-down brick house.  I could see a family at breakfast, talking quietly and picking at their plates with little interest while two kids ran around in the living room, ambivalent to the mood that pervaded the dinner table.   
A stiff breeze began to blow, rustling the trees and blades of grass, carrying with it an eerie whisper.    Slowly the whisper molded itself into something more substantial, thicker, until it became a voice in the back of my mind.  Incomprehensible, it nevertheless left a mark in my memory, explicit instructions on what I had to do.  It carried with it the glint of a vision.  A face.  An older man, scared to release.  All at once I knew why my attention had been drawn to this house.  
I walked steadfast up to the front porch and passed right through the closed screen door.  I entered the kitchen and stood by the dinner table with interest.  ‘What?’ I wondered.  ‘What am I supposed to do?’  
One of the women at the table suddenly straightened up in her seat and turned over her shoulder to look at the kids in the next room.  “Andy, Abby, come in here and sit down,” she ordered in concern.  The kids quieted down and ran into the kitchen.  Observing the house I noticed that the kitchen had been much neglected.  Pots and pans were stacked haphazardly by the sink, dirt and crumbs lay scattered on the floor, and the garbage can was piled high with boxes of TV dinners and candy wrappers.   I tuned into the conversation at the table.
“Honey will you grab those eggs off the stove?” the mother asked to her husband, a wiry, fidgety man.  “It’s time for him to eat.”
The husband made a face.  It’s time for him to die,” he answered, scooting back his chair and throwing his napkin in the seat.”  The woman’s jaw dropped and she stood as well.
“How dare you talk about my father like that?”
“Ilene it’s true.  Your father is old and he’s in a lot of pain.  And this cancer has made him a bitter old man.  I don’t know why he keeps hanging on.”
“I don’t know why I hang on to you!” the woman called Ilene said with outrage.  “I’ll do it myself.”  With that she went over to the stove and grabbed the food from within.  I followed her through dim and dreary dining room, and then towards a closed door at the far end of the house.  From the crack underneath the door light seeped through, along with the unmistakable musty smell of age.  As the woman eased open the door and passed into the room I could see him, lying bedridden in his contemporary home, sucking down oxygen through a nasal cannula.  He seemed totally unaware of my presence.
The woman shook him gently by the shoulder but he did not answer.  At last she left the food by the bedside and left the room quietly.  Alone with the old man I knelt and spoke.
“Let go old codger,” I advised.  “What are you hanging on to?  What are you scared of?  You call this living?” I saw the old man slowly ball a fist, his knuckles blanching at the effort, almost as if he had heard but completely ignored me.  Wheezy, labored breaths worked their way up his windpipe.
“That’s it, let go.”  I heard him cough.  “Let go.”  He relaxed his muscles and took another pull of chunky liquid in the straw, refocusing his attention on the soap opera that droned on in the TV set.  He would not let go of his pain filled life.
“Aggghhh!” I muttered in frustration, swiping at his oxygen tube.  To my surprise, my fingers caught hold and the line ripped, oxygen hissing out like a snake.  The old man shot upright and clutched his throat, trying to withhold his precious air.  He fumbled for the medic alert device that lay on the nightstand beside him, but somehow knocked it off into the thick carpet below.  His heart began to race, and then it skipped a beat.  I watched his life ebb away before my very eyes.  In the last few moments he saw me I think, because his eyes got big as marbles.  “No…” he wheezed.  At the ruckus the family members came rushing in to see the old man’s body lying limp by the bed, the oxygen sensor light beeping intermittently.
From behind me I heard clapping.  I spun to see the shadow rise from the corner, applauding loudly.  “Well done well done!  And with a dramatic flare no less.  How did that feel?  I like how you let him suffer a little before you took his life.”
“What do you mean suffer, I-“
“Oh don’t worry.  It’s fun to watch them die.  I can’t blame you.”
“But-“
“You learned the second art of your craft.  It takes most of the new ones hundreds of kills before they pick that up.”
“You mean when I ripped his oxygen?  How did I do that?  I thought I couldn’t touch anything.  I mean, just a few minutes ago I was walking through walls.”
“You did far more than that my friend.  You crossed from the spirit world into the real world and back again, so fast and efficiently that the old man didn’t even sense your presence.  You have realized your second endowment as an angel of death…speed.”
“So if I learned the second art, what is the first?”
“I’ve already hinted at it.”
“Stealth.”
“Correct.  Stealth is by far the most important skill.  Our presence should not be felt on this earth.  Occasionally it happens.  We do our best to make sure it never happens again.  Remember, you are no longer physical form, but rather spiritual essence.  You are like water: ever-persistent, slowly wearing away all that stands in your path.  You may take any form you may pass through any terrain.  No crack is small enough to keep you out, no rock solid enough to resist your advance.  Learn to move without being felt, learn to hide where no one would look, learn to be still and silent and patient.  That’s the first lesson.”
“And then?”
“And then you will see the ghastly fear in their eyes as their last breaths are upon them.  Take joy in their pain, in a sacred, secret art that few can master.”
“Have you mastered it then?” I asked.
The shadow laughed.  “I’ve been around a long time.”
“How long are we here?” I asked.  
“As long as it takes,” the shadow responded quickly.  
“What kind of answer is that?”
“Be patient!  You will soon see what it does to our kind.  I advise you to take pride in craft.  Make others suffer as you once suffered.  If you do this, your time here will pass without notice.”
“We’re here forever aren’t we?” I asked, but the wraith had receded into the anonymity of shadows.  It didn’t matter.  I knew the answer before I had even begun to ask, and it poisoned me with rage.  
I looked at the family as they wallowed in grief and realized what I had just done.  I killed him.  
I killed him.  This was my reward for a life of pain?  A life of causing pain?  I did not ask for this.  I had seen enough weeping of late.  Why me?  The life I had just taken only served to make me angrier, like drugs feed addiction.  All of the sudden the voices and images piled up in my head like a train wreck, so many names, faces, and places that I hardly knew what to do first.  All I knew was that I wanted to hurt.  As I prepared to take flight from the house, I noticed a blue glow from the corner of the room and made out the figure of an angel, heavenly, yet blurry in my vision.  I glanced away and looked back, but the figure was gone.  Likewise, I fled, and when I was far away I stopped to clear my mind of all the preconceived notions and physical boundaries that had once held me to the earth.  It was time to unleash. 



Through city streets I dashed, past the dilapidated houses where I used to sell crack, through deserted alleys that I used to call home, I ran as if I was being drawn by an unseen force that I could not resist, did not want to resist.  I suddenly stopped near the fire escape of a dirty apartment complex.  Looking upwards I could feel him, hear him breathe heavily…my next victim.  I climbed the fire escape slowly, methodically, planning my method of attack.  His visage entered my mind before I actually saw him.  I could almost hear his thoughts, they screamed so loud inside his head.  His mind was a mess.  At last, on the fourth floor of the complex, through venetian blinds that blocked out the sun I caught a glimpse of him.  He was a middle aged man with frazzled, stringy hair in filthy, warn-out clothing, sitting cross-legged on his bed with a gun to his forehead.  His hand wavered spastically and the gun rubbed up and down against his temples.  Before him, on the bed, was a picture of a smiling woman, probably an ex-girlfriend or cheating wife, something like that.  I didn’t care.  I had seen it all before and I felt nothing.  I diffused through the cracks in the blinds and crept quickly and quietly up behind him, positioning right behind the ear to his open mind.  
“Do it,” I whispered.  His fingers flicked the safety.  I grinned.  My invisible fingers slipped over the trigger and helped him ease back the hammer.  He began to cry audibly.  “Do it.” I repeated.
“I hate this world!” he yelled, and together we squeezed the trigger, spattering blood against the far wall of the dimly lit room.   The man slumped forward in his bed, dripping blood down upon the photograph.  
I sat and watched silently for a moment as his body functions slowly ceased, and when I looked up I noticed the angelic figure again, standing in the corner of the room, even fainter now.
“Who are you?”  I yelled.  
There was no response or movement.  I rubbed my eyes, and when I looked back she was gone.  I leapt through the wall and off the fire escape, down to the ground below.
Again I felt drawn, insatiably bloodthirsty, this time towards the edge of the city and a more upscale, upbeat atmosphere.  I hated it.  I hated the cheeriness of it, because I could never have it. I wandered into a lush green park and the images came into my mind once again; this time it was a smiling little girl.  I found her at a picnic table just above the roadway, rolling a big pink ball back and forth among some other children.  She was a child of five or six, hair in pigtails, dressed in a yellow flowery dress.  She looked so happy.   I seated myself at the picnic table next to the family and listened as they talked and ate contentedly.  
“Isn’t she precious?” one asked as they watched play in adoration.  
“She’s made us so happy.  I don’t know what we’d do without her,” another said.
“Only six years old, and already she wants to be a veterinarian.”
“Ooooh…” one of the women cooed.  I felt sick.  No one had ever expressed that kind of love and admiration for me.  I was a mistake and a burden in my father’s eyes.
I swept through the grass like the wind itself until I was just behind one of the boys she was playing with.   Eyes focused on the highway just behind the little girl, I waited until the right time.  As the ball rolled over to the young boy, he prepared to kick it back to the girl.  My foot moved in unison with his, and as he made contact with the ball he sent it soaring just above the girl’s head.  She jumped to try and catch it but could not.  As she turned to run and chase it, I followed.  The ball rolled down the hill, closer and closer to the road.  The child was so intent on the big pink ball that she didn’t notice the gray minivan rounding the bend.  
Her fingers glanced the ball and pushed it forward even further, out into the street.  The girl slowed herself as if to stop short of the road, but I grabbed her shoe tightly and sent her head over heels onto the pavement.  She lay there, crying and inspecting her injuries, and failed to notice the van until it was too late.  As she stood up, pouting and brushing herself off, the grill of the car made contact and sent her flying forward.  The van screeched to a halt, nearly crashing in a ditch beside the hill, and the driver got out. 
“Oh my god oh my god oh my god.”
The road was littered with bits of torn yellow fabric, a tiny black sandal, a few teeth, and an appendage.  I swallowed in deep-rooted fear, fear of myself.  But the deed only made me angrier. 
Six million ways to die, and I was just beginning to explore them all.  I don’t know how many lives I ended, but the voices kept coming to me like the timeless ocean tide, feeding my swelling rage, but only making me more thirsty and leaving me feeling more empty inside.  There was no comfort or consolation.  I killed them quickly and painfully, bystanders oblivious to the icy cold phenomenon that lurked right beside them.  At each step I grew angrier with myself and the world, with each life I took I grew stronger and more capable, more hollow to the conscience in the back of my mind that pleaded to me  to stop.  As the voices and images subsided, I heard a familiar voice.
“Well done!  That’s impressive time.”  It was the shadow.
“Why do you keep following me?” I asked in an agitated voice.  
“Because I think you have enormous potential.”
“Potential for what?  To kill?  So what?  How hard is it to put a bullet through someone’s skull?” I yelled.
“Easy.  I’m just here to help.”
“I don’t need your help.”
“You certainly are capable of killing, that much is evident,” he said, pointing me toward the mangled head I had just severed with a piece of farm machinery.  “But let me show you something,” he said, casting his shadow over me to envelope me in darkness.  We rematerialized on a crowded, windy, construction-ridden highway.
“How did you do that?”
“The laws of physics do not hold us, mind you.  We are not part of this world.  When you can understand that, you can be anywhere in the world at any time you wish.  Never mind that for now.  What do you see here?” he asked.
“A highway.  Lots of cars.”
“You know what I see?  Potential.  Notice the lanes merging up ahead.  Imagine if one of these drivers were to suddenly become drowsy…slowly drift off to sleep.  It happens all the time.”  Before I could catch his drift, we were in the cab of a semi and the shadow’s hand passed over the driver’s eyes.  The shadow’s cool, calculated voice continued.  “Add to that a construction barrel that has tipped over in the stiff breeze.”  The wind picked up, and one of the barrels that had been blocking off the closed lane tipped over and began to roll across the highway.  I sat and watched in horror.
As a compact car slammed on its breaks to avoid the barrel, the car behind it careened forward through the rear bumper, causing a chain reaction of twisting metal, shattered glass, and roiling flames.  Just behind, the oblivious truck driver lapsed into a state of sleep and failed to notice the merging lanes.  At the last minute he looked up and swerved, sending the opposite lane of traffic plunging off the highway, rolling and tumbling multiple times.  A few bodies were ejected from their vehicles.  He swerved back in an unconscious reflex and the truck capsized, spitting forth sparks as it skidded across the highway, taking out everything in its path.  Behind it, cars began to pile up like dominoes, passengers breaking through windshields or compacting their weak bodies against steering wheels and dashboards.  
“What you are watching is a well orchestrated tragedy, my friend,” the shadow gloated.  “You don’t need to be brutal to be efficient.  A few subtle gestures and the bodies just pile.”
“You’re sick.”
The shadow laughed.  “You’ll get used to it.”
“I can’t do it.”
“Everyone dies, alright!” the shadow snarled, “and they die when it’s their time, so you might as well play along.  You are not a killer.  You are doing your job!” then calmer, “and doing it quite well I might add.”
“If everyone dies when it’s their time then what does it matter if I play your stupid game or not?”
“There are nearly six billion people on this planet, all trying to live out their pathetic lives in search of greatness, six billion people seeking perfection in an imperfect world.  All you are doing is sending them home, and keeping them from crowding up a world already overflowing with bodies.  We need your help.”
“No.  No, I’m out.”
“You have no choice.  Just try to resist it, when the voices pound in your head.  When the visions haunt your mind.  Others have tried and they have been broken.  They now wander the earth aimlessly, lost souls.”
“I hate you.”
“Hate is good.”
“Get out of here.”
“You’re right, what am I thinking?  You have work to do.”



For a while my head was quieted of the voices and visions that drew me to kill.  With only time now to kill, I tried to figure out where I could go.  I needed some kind of answer.  
I don’t know what brought me to her door, or how I even found her for that matter.  Even as I stood beside her I knew that the distance that separated us could not be crossed.  And yet I was drawn, perhaps by nostalgia, perhaps by curiosity, maybe even the unshakeable and animalistic instinct of attraction that still pervaded my undead soul.  
She was sitting at an old antique desk in her nightgown, staring at the mirror absently, her nursing scrubs draped carelessly over the back of the chair.  I wanted to touch her.  I needed to feel something real and visceral, but as I reached out to soothe her, my hand passed uselessly through.  Why?  I could touch objects and victims, why not one of the living?  I couldn’t bear to sit and watch her, knowing my ties to my past had been forever broken, yet I could not tear myself away.
My eyes fell upon a single picture frame that adorned her desk.  Within its confines lay not the typical family portrait that I had expected, but Anna in her scrubs and surgeon’s mask, dark hair flowing down around slender shoulders.  Within deep-feeling eyes she looked down with care, patience, and adoration on a frail young child in a hospital bed who, despite his despondent condition, gave his broadest, goofiest grin to the camera.  Scanning her desk I saw a few letters and bills, a cluttered mess of sticky notes with phone numbers, grocery lists, and things-to-do scrawled haphazardly across their surface.  Some lipstick, an old fashion alarm clock, a fitness magazine.  I refocused on the clock where something seemed out of place.  The hands were standing still.  Broken perhaps.
Anna once again became the focus of my attention, eyes with tears welling up and collecting upon long, dark lashes.  In her hands she clutched the gold chain and crucifix that I had died with around my neck.  Never so badly had I wanted to call out or give comfort as I did right now.  I focused my thoughts on hers and spoke.
“Don’t cry,” I whispered.  She wiped the tears from her eyes.”
“The world is full of hurt, all over, every minute of every day.  Death isn’t tragedy…it’s discovery.”  Anna’s frown straightened and she looked into the mirror, expecting to see someone behind her.  I thought back on the time we spent in the infirmary talking, and tried to communicate those thoughts to her.  I don’t know if she could hear me, but she smiled softly, her eyes gazing off into nowhere.  I couldn’t help but smile inside.  She can hear me.  I know it.
“You’re stuck with me too babe,” I said, rising up and withdrawing from the room.



I could have gone anywhere.  I had the freedom to explore the world, but yet I found myself roaming the same old streets I had grown up in. Through the anonymity of death, I had the privilege of observing all these things, never worrying about who was observing me. The sights were all too familiar.  Stubborn smog clouds bolstered by industry and excess blocking out a tired moon. Dirty, dusty streets littered with broken glass and broken dreams.  Cracked plaster buildings with iron bars and Masterlocks attempting futilely to withhold reality.  The harsh reality of 'grown-up life' can't be hidden from impoverished eyes, though.  It is painfully evident in every liquor store and porn shop window, in the callused hands of the bum on the corner and inside the wrinkled paper bag of the neighborhood dealer.  Most people grow up with it, live with it, bear it like a cross.  Some even idolize it.  Others run, escape, so they say.  They rush full-force into corporate America, blindly chasing dollar signs and fast cars.  If you study them hard enough, you can see the bright lights of the big city reflected in their eyes just before they hop on the bus on their way to be swallowed by skyscrapers.  
Every once in awhile you'll find the dreamer.  Make no mistake, he sees them: the collapsing houses, the half-dressed hookers and the bleary eyed junkies, the towering buildings, the fast cars, and the neon lights. He sees these things with a clarity that very few realize and almost no one can hang on to.  The neon lights are blinding, the fast car provides a one way trip to a makeshift contentedness, and the towering building houses a cubicle prison eternity.  In the bleary eyed junky, though, lies an open mind.  In the half-dressed hooker is a forever searching heart.  In that collapsing house is a family, feeding off each other's laughter, encouragement, dreams, and tears to stay alive.  All mankind sees these things from time to time, but the dreamer sees them and will not look away.  He gathers the strength within himself and pours it out into the souls of others, until he has given so much that he himself is nothing.
I saw all these things in the streets revisited.  A part of me longed for the simplicity of it, the quiet struggle, the clear concept of self and the lack of societal expectations.  Back then at least I knew my place.  Another part of me knew that I was destined for something much different however…that there was a truth to divine, only I couldn’t quite find it.  
Luckily, truth found me, and it came in the form of a filthy, haggard street-dweller.  I was walking the long line of trashcan fires and lean-to shelters when I noticed that among the crowd of bums, someone was watching me.  Impossible.  No one could see me.  No human, at least.  Yet the wrinkled eyes of the old man traced me no matter where I walked, watching me fearfully, curiously.  The old man’s eyes darted from left to right, and from beneath a tattered, oil-stained blanket a finger emerged which motioned me closer.  
It was my turn now to look from left to right, but no one stood near me.  ‘Could it be he sees me?’ I wondered.  I stepped closer and he nodded eagerly.  I huddled down beside him and he whispered in harsh, mysterious tones.  “I see them, yes.  I see you.”
“there he goes again.  Crazy old codger,” one of the other bums said to her companion. 
“How can you-“
“There is still hope for you, yes.  They haven’t broken you.”
“Who?”
“Don’t believe what you are told.  You are more than dead, less than trapped.”
“How do you know all this?” I asked.  Again my question was ignored.  
“They do not have to suffer.  You do not have to linger.” 	“Look I don’t know who you are but-“
“Set them free.  Set them free.” 
“Look how do I even know I can trust you, I-“
The bum’s eyes grew large and he pointed past me.  I glanced behind my shoulder and saw nothing, but heard rapidly retreating footsteps.  Retreating under the confines of his dirty blanket the stranger began to wail loudly.  The vagrants next to him merely shook their heads and proceeded to warm their hands over the fire.  I stepped back, disconcerted.  In some enigmatic way his words made sense, I just had to figure out how to piece them together, only I had no time, as I felt the familiar sensation in the back of my mind that told me of the situation soon to come. 
I realized I wasn’t angry anymore, and I was starting to suspect that I was capable of more than I was being told.  The vision of a young woman lying in a hospital bed came vividly alive, and within moments I was there in the bustling emergency room, doctors rushing back and forth with charts and meds, ambulance workers pushing in more and more patients.  I walked calmly past them all and into the room where the young girl of my vision lay.  
This time, rather than putting an end to her life, I was curious.  Curious as to why she was dying and why it was me who had to end her life.  I looked at the clipboard that had been left on the IV tray and read her medical history:  

Female, 26, Susanne Nielsen.  Hx: Aplastic Anemia.  R: 26.  BP: 98/60 P:108.  Tx: Blood transfusion, bone marrow.

The chart looked grim.  This woman needed blood transfusion and a bone marrow donor.  My guess was that she would find neither, which is why I had been summoned.  I realized this woman would probably die, regardless of my presence.  So why was I summoned?  The old man’s whispers rang in my ears.  There is still hope for you.  They do not have to suffer.
I walked right through the doctors and nurses that hovered around her to kneel by the bedside and stare at the woman’s soft features and pale, clammy flesh.  She looked drained of energy and drugged up.  I didn’t know if she would be aware of anyone’s presence, even a nurse’s, but I had to try and reach her, as much for my own good as for hers.  I had to act on a theory that had been formulating in my mind since my first kill.  Focusing all my energy, I diffused through the IV line and into her body, joining my conscious mind with hers.  Somehow I felt it, the disease spreading through the body uncontrollably.  Ringing ears, headache, swollen ankles; the early signs of shock.  It wouldn’t be long.  
Susanne.  Something stirred within her.  She could not comprehend who was talking to her, but she did lend attention to the voice.  You are going to die.  The heart began to race faster.  I could feel the blood pumping hard against the vessel walls as fear set in and adrenaline was released.  Please try to be calm.  You will be happier where you are going.  I know it.  The heart rate slowed a bit.  I am watching over you.  The signals from the brain began to slow, replaced by a feeling of calmness.  There is no pain where you are going.  I hoped I was right.  Sleep.  I felt everything in her body relax, including her blood vessels which began to slowly dilate.  Somewhere without I could hear the monitor blaring as the blood pressure dropped rapidly.  You’re doing just fine.  She began to shiver, and her heart slowed to a halt.  The body trembled.  They must be trying to shock.  Sleep.
I let my consciousness slip from hers and I was back beside the bed, the doctors and nurses frantically rushing about the room.  I stood up and walked away.  Yeah, I think she is going to Heaven, I thought to myself warmly.  I felt good that she had not been tormented in her final moments.  As I wandered along the crowded street in front of the hospital, the shadow materialized before me.
“What the hell was that?” he snarled.  I knew he was referring to the woman in the hospital.  
“She heard me didn’t she?  I thought you said that was impossible.”
“They hear what they want to hear.  You did nothing, nothing but foul up a perfectly good opportunity.”
“Opportunity for what?  You said it yourself.  We are here forever.  What difference does it make if I make them suffer or give them comfort?  You still haven’t answered that question!”
“It makes all the difference,” the shadow hissed.  The old bum’s voice hissed out again.  Do not believe what you are told. 
“You know what I think?  I think you’re lying.  Or scared.  Or maybe just ignorant.  That old man heard me when I told him to let go, and Anna too.  I think I’m more powerful than you think.”
The shadow neared to within inches of my face and spoke in an icy, menacing tone.  “You are nothing,” and with that he enveloped me in his cloak and I felt my body accelerate downward.  
Things around me began to feel intensely hot, soon becoming unbearable.  I wrenched myself free of the darkness and as I did I looked down at the ground I was plummeting toward.  I collapsed in a heap on some sharp, jagged stones and noticed thick black blood oozing from my wounds.  I stood up slowly and noticed that the shadow was gone.  
Looking around me, I saw that I stood on a well-beaten path beneath a tired, burning torchlight that hung from a wrought-iron gate.  As I stepped toward the gate, it swung open with an oppressive groan.  I walked through and followed the dusty path down a steep hill, trying in vain to peer into the night, searching for some recognizable form.  As the path became yet steeper and more treacherous, I found myself stumbling frequently.  At one point I toppled headfirst to the ground, catching myself at the last minute with hands that plunged into soot and ash.  I tried to wipe the blackness off but it clung like a stain.  I plodded onward.  
My surroundings grew gradually lighter as I proceeded into a steep valley, rock walls towering above me like silent sentinels.  At last, bathed in a pale orange afterglow, I reached a ledge and knelt cautiously over to view what lay below.  What I saw gave me chills. 
An endless line of people all shuffling slowly and methodically as if they were on a chain gang.  Their destination seemed to be a narrow, dark river that wandered haphazardly through the valley.  The people’s sunken eyes seemed transfixed on the river ahead, totally oblivious to those in front of and behind them.  I exhaled loudly. “Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me” I said, recalling the remnants of an old Bible passage.
I rose up slowly, shivers running up my spine as I did so.  I glimpsed behind me and realized I was staring directly into the pale face of a dead man.  He was the first of many, all waiting in line as if they had eternity.  And of course, I realized, they probably did.
I dropped down off the ledge and approached the river with apprehension, catching up with the rest of the line.  After some time I grew tired of waiting and pushed past the line until I stood at the muddy banks of the river.  No sooner had I done so then a boat pulled up to shore of its own accord.  The wood was old and warped, and I guessed that the boat had probably made an innumerable amount of trips down this river, carrying the dead.  As I hopped in, I began to wonder how I had arrived here, what had become of the shadow, and what possible fate could await me at the river’s end.
I shoved off and the boat lurched downstream, following the banks as if it were guided by a track.  Occasionally I would hear something collide with the hull and the boat would jostle slightly, always pressing onward.   Behind me I heard rustling, and I looked back to see a woman jump out of the boat behind me and sink underneath the water’s obscure surface.  As I looked down to try and find where she had disappeared to, I noticed that there were many bodies floating in the river, which explained the bumps I felt from time to time.  
Eventually the river picked up speed and the sound of rushing water grew louder.  Before I knew what had happened, the boat was spinning around in a giant circle, gaining velocity with each rotation.  Looking to the center of this enormous drain I saw a giant hole into which all of the water was pouring.  I clutched the rails of the boat and held for dear life as the boat spun out of control and capsized into the breech. 
The next thing I knew, I was descending once again, dark falling water all around me, pounding me downward.  Still falling, arms and legs flailing wildly for balance, I tried to blink back the water that filled my sight.  Looking below me I saw a valley of fire and a boiling river that I was about to encounter.
I soon was submerged in scalding hot water and found myself clawing at the surface to escape the furious heat.  I collapsed in exhaustion at the shore, every inch of my body burning.  When I finally could stand and look about, my worst fears were confirmed.  This was hell.  
If you were to picture the most painful, agonizing and exasperating situation you could find yourself in, you might only catch a glimpse of what hell is really like.  As I picked my way among a crowd of shackled and chained bodies that fueled enormous roiling flames with coal from massive iron shovels, the thing that caught my eye was a strikingly gorgeous woman in a tattered, once elegant dress, moaning hysterically.  Then I saw why, her hands and feet were swelling rapidly, puffing up and spreading throughout her body.  She shrieked and wailed to no avail, her face now beginning to stretch.  She no longer looked beautiful.  In fact, she looked horrendous.  I turned away, blanching at the spectacle.
Further ahead I walked until the smell of burning, rotting flesh gave me pause.  I looked ahead and saw a frantic crowd brawling amongst each other, occasionally tossing a member of the group into the flames where they burned but remained awake to their doom.
Walking onward, desperately seeking respite from all this anguish, I found myself amongst a crowd of people murmuring and whispering incoherently.  Apparently, whatever they were telling each other was of no comfort because occasionally they would break down weeping, shout angrily, or begin to shiver and sweat.  As I pushed through the crowd, a face caught my eye that stopped me dead in my tracks.  It was my brother.
“Scott.  It’s-but you can’t-this is,” I stammered in disbelief.
“This is hell, and you’re here too.”
Again, the voice of the man on the street resonated in my mind.  You are more than dead, less than trapped.  I clenched my fists and gnashed my teeth.  “This can’t be.  You don’t belong here!  I don’t belong here.  This isn’t real,” I said, closing my eyes.  “This isn’t real.  This isn’t REAL!”
I opened my eyes to familiar laughter.  The shadow.  “Oh it’s very real my friend,” the shadow said, pointing down at me.  I looked at my hands, still covered in soot.
“How did you do that?” I demanded.
“You don’t need to know how it was done, all you need to know is that it can be done.  We walk a thin line, you and I.  At even the slightest misstep, tragedy is waiting like a wild, hungry beast.  I’d watch your step if I were you.  It’s a long way down.”



It wasn’t long before it started again, another unsuspecting, innocent face pushing itself to the forefront of my mind.  By now I was feverish with the persistence of the visions.  This time it was a child, no more than 12, sitting by a stream with his fishing pole in hand, my own hands filled with a decision of great weight.  By now I had seen possibility, capability.  I had come to realize during the course of my experiences that there are always two choices in life, and one big question.  The choices are simple enough, on the surface: right…or wrong?  The question, unfortunately, is far more complex.  Who decides what is right and what is wrong?
This question launched me into a multitude of other questions and doubts.  Is it these shadows and skeletons and apparitions that haunt my travels who decide?  Is it me?  Or is it God?  Is there a God?  Is there such thing as right or wrong or do we make it up as we go along?  I postponed my judgment on the matter as I saw the child, all by himself, casting the line upstream with considerable skill for a kid of his age.  The whole picture somehow brought back memories of my own childhood.  The kid seemed perfectly happy.  Two glistening fish lay already at the bottom of a muddy plastic bucket.  Trophies perhaps, maybe dinner.  The kid didn’t seem much to care, his eyes focused perpetually upon the rippling and frothing water ahead.  I came even closer, the fly line whistling past my ear as I neared.  It snapped forward through me and nestled down gently in slow current.  Right behind him now, I stood watching him watching the river.  It would be so easy…but I couldn’t do it.  If I didn’t kill him though, what would happen to me? 
Suddenly the slack disappeared on the narrow line and the child sprang to life.  He set the hook, increased tension on the reel, turned the fish on its side and watched jovially as it ran.  A few feet into his backing he began to reel in, the rod flexing like a bow as he did so.   He fought the fish, feet dragging in the dirt as he drew nearer and nearer to the edge.  If there was a time, it was now.
I had an irrepressible urge, not wholly my own, to kick the dirt loose from underneath him and send him plunging into the mighty river when suddenly he lurched back and pulled the fish free of the water, splashing in all directions.  It was a beautiful fish; rainbow stripes blending like watercolors across her spotted gray side.  The fish did not look happy to be plucked from its home, thrashing helplessly from side to side.   All of the sudden that voice again became enlivened in my mind, as if the gaunt-faced transient was right beside me.  Set them free. 
The kid set his pole down at the water’s edge and yanked the fish from the barbed hook that pierced its thin rubbery mouth.  He held it up to the glistening sunlight and smiled broadly, admiring his handiwork.  Helplessly the fish slapped its tail against the boy’s hands, its life steadily ebbing away.  Gradually it stopped thrashing to accept impending death and the boy bent over to put the fish into his bucket.  Yet something gave him pause.  He looked the fish in its glassy, lazy eyes, rubbed down the silvery skin, gave it a kiss and heaved it into the water.  The fish darted downstream and the boy rubbed his slimy hands on his waders.  “Not today mister fish,” he said.
As he stepped back from the bank, he accidentally kicked his pole, sending it into the steady current.  With panic he followed it downstream, grasping at it from the shore.  In a futile attempt he hung himself over the river as far as he could and brushed the rod with his fingertips, sending it spiraling away.  In the process, he lost his balance and plunged into the icy cold current.  The water rushed into his waders, dragging him under the surface like a sinking stone.  He fumbled with the straps but could not release them.
Set them free.  Images of my own days fishing flashed like snapshots in my mind.  Without another moment’s pause, I plunged into the water and shot forth with purpose, accelerating like a torpedo, catching the child in my arms and drawing him to the shore where he rolled onto his back.  He was bleeding, trembling and choking all at once, water spewing form his mouth uncontrollably.  I stood over him and smiled.  “Not today kid.”  I was so proud of myself I hardly noticed the figure standing behind me.
“Interesting approach,” a solid yet unmistakably feminine voice said from behind me.
I whirled around to see who was speaking and was shocked at what I saw.  
“Oh my God.  You’re…my…”
“I’m your guardian angel.”
“But you look just like-“
She put a delicate finger to her lips and I fell silent.  “You always were a talker.”  She ruffled her wings and laughed at some unforeseen memory, and I stood speechless.  “Look at you,” she said adoringly.  “I never thought you’d grow up to be so big and strong.  You have your dad’s features.  So concerned, so pained.”
“I thought you were supposed to save people, not kill them,” I said in an accusatory tone. 
“I thought you were supposed to kill people, not save them,” she retorted inquisitively.  Her voice carried with it a gentleness that could not be misconstrued as criticism.
“I’m tired of watching people die.”  
“Everyone dies, Mike.”
“People keep reminding me of that like it is going to make me feel better or something.”
“Maybe I am here to save you.”
“You’re a little late.  I’m already dead.”
“Yeah?”  You don’t seem so dead to me,” the angel said, nodding toward the boy collapsed on the river’s edge.
“Look, that isn’t my fault, I-“
“Slow down.  Nobody is blaming you.”
“But I was told-“
“Look, I know you’ve heard this before, and from the most unreliable of sources, but this fact happens to be true.  We walk a fine line between good and evil.  The problem lies not in falling, but in which way we fall.”
“And which way have I fallen?”
“You haven’t yet.  That’s why I’m here.  See, until now, you were just like all the others.  Walk the street, do your job.  Next thing you know, you’re dead to the world and dead wrong.  You start believing that whole song and dance about ‘do this, don’t do that, this is impossible.’  You’ve been awfully close to plunging Mike, I won’t lie.  You killed with the intent to terrify, to maim, and to obliterate.  That’s not easily forgivable.”
“But-“
“But this here.  This was art, pure beauty Mike.  You went against everything you’d been told to save this child’s life.  Why?”
“Because he reminded me of me.”
“Noble, but you can do better than that.  Why?”
“Because I didn’t want to see him drown.”
“Why?”
“Because I don’t like to kill.”
“You know why I think you did it?  Because of faith.  Because deep down in your heart of hearts you still believe there’s something else.  You are drowning, but at least your head is above the water.”
“If that’s the case, I wish someone would just pull me out.  Show me the way.  Because so far all I’ve received from the church has been a funeral service.  I’ve seen hell, I’ve seen pain, I’ve seen suffering.  All I want to see is Heaven…and God.  Where is he in all this mess?  If I’m drowning, he must be helping to hold me under because I’ve been stepped on and pushed down my entire life.”
“And yet your life is a privilege compared to some.  Close your eyes.  Allow me to put things in perspective.”
I closed them, and upon command reopened them just in time to see a man, half naked, rushing at me with an enormous, rudely crafted knife, yelling in an unfamiliar tongue.  I ducked and covered my head, the sword passing within inches of my head.  Face buried in the dry Earth, I saw and felt blood spatter across the ground.  Spinning, I turned to see a gaunt, shocked face staring down at the jagged object embedded between his skinny ribs.  He slid to the ground and collapsed face-first in the dirt. 
The assailant had no time to triumph as gunshots rang out.  One exploded through his leg, severing an artery and sending blood squirting in all directions.  He collapsed, screaming and clutching his fractured femur.  Looking around me I saw them everywhere, blood-starved and soul-thirsty.
“They are fighting for a cause they cannot understand.  This is how it has always been.  Look-“ She pointed, and I began to see them.  Lurking behind every murderous device and hovering over every dwindling life was a specter of death just like me.
“Jesus,” I said, looking over the carnage.  “They’re everywhere.”  I followed the angel as we walked across the poisoned desert landscape, amidst shrieks, cries and gunshots.  Occasionally we would step over a rotting corpse, the stench itself nearly unbearable, not to mention the sight.  Flies swarmed in and out of every orifice, and buzzards picked apart and carried off internal organs.
We approached one of the rival villages, a series of tents, hovels, and lean-tos that had been ransacked, pillaged, and torched.  The angel spoke softly.  “This is how it is everyday.  These people fight to live, live to eat, and eat to fight some more.”  I stared at a child doubled over in pain, skin hugged tightly around bony ribs, belly distended from malnutrition.  A wraith waited eagerly for life to slip away, while the mother of the child knelt beside, half-dazed and weeping.
“These angels of death are equally numbed to the tragedy.  They will proceed throughout life, waiting hungrily to steal those dying breaths without solace, barely aware that they exist.  And you thought you had it bad.  These people toil night and day, inch by inch nearing what they have been told is progress by lawmakers and business leaders that lie across vast and unfamiliar oceans.”
“What does this have to do with me?”
“It has everything to do with you!  All that surrounds you is part of a precariously balanced system.  Your fate is inextricably tied to this dying child, as its fate is tied to you.  Like you, these people have been mislead and lied to, stepped on and cast down.”
“So are they helpless then?  Hopeless?”
“They have one choice, just as you do?”
“Which is?”
“Fight or do not fight.”
“And either way they end up like this.”
“This is not the end, Mike.  There is far more to life than this.  You’ve already seen that.”
“Okay, but either way they die in misery.”
“Which is exactly why you are so important to their future.”
“So if they chose not to fight, what solace is there in that?”
“These people have silently suffered through circumstances most could not possibly endure.  Their reward will come in Heaven.”
I frowned and shook off the suggestion.  “I’ve heard enough about God and Heaven and salvation.  So far all I’ve seen is pain and death and hell.”
“Blessed are those who have not seen, and still believe.”
“I need something to believe in first.”
She shook her head sadly and lowered her eyes.  “After all you’ve seen and been through, you still don’t get it.  If your life is so bad, what do you have to lose?  Yes, you’ve suffered.  You’ve been through hell and back and still you stand where you began.  If nothing else you have realized that the world is heavy.  Don’t try to bear the weight on your shoulders alone.”
“It’s been so hard.  I’ve been alone ever since the day you left.”
“I know.  I’m sorry.  He left me with no choice.”  I nodded, and we embraced awkwardly, tightly.  
At length I asked, “what’s it like?  Heaven?”  
“Heaven is truth.”
“And what is truth?”
“Truth cannot be told.  It can only be experienced.”
“How?”
“I can’t tell you Mike, I’m sorry.  What I can tell you is this.  When the body dies, only the soul lives on, finally free to roam where it pleases, to see that which was once hidden.  The limitations you experience are only limited by the constructs of your mind.”
“So I can do it?” I asked eagerly.  “Make it to Heaven?” 
“It’s not that simple,” she said with sad eyes.  
“But it is possible?”
“Mike, every breath you take brings with it possibility.”
“Then I’ll find a way,” I said resurgently, rising to my feet.  I looked deep into those precious eyes and saw unshakable hope returned.  
“I believe in you Mike.  Always have.”  A tear rolled down her face.  “I love you son.”
“I love you too Mom.”  And with that she spread her wings and rose up as if she had been borne up on the breath of dawn, disappearing amongst blue sky and sun’s rays.  
When I looked down from the warm bright sky I saw that I stood once again at the riverbank.  The child I had saved lay on the far edge, water rolling off his body into the tall green grass and cattails that adorned the river’s edge.  His eyes were closed and he appeared to be unconscious until a tiny golden bee settled down on his nose.  His eyes opened and he began to wretch and cough, surrendering up the water that had threatened to end him.  The bee took flight and the boy slowly and unsteadily staggered to his feet.
He looked down at his heavy, drenched clothes, then up at the sun and clear blue sky, perhaps wondering how or where or maybe even why.  He knelt and bent over the cold stream, shivering slightly in the gentle breeze, to look at his wavering unsteady reflection.  He touched a finger to the surface and the reflection dissipated into the swifter current.  A smile grew slowly on the young boy’s face, spreading further and further until it burst into a toothy grin.  He grabbed a handful of muddy earth and tossed it into the air, grabbed his pole which lay trapped up in the reeds just downstream, and ran off down the banks, laughing uncontrollably.  
I couldn’t help but smile and have a look up into that deep blue sky myself.
“I see Him, Mom.  I see Him.”



I felt overwhelmed by the revelation that occurred to me as I thought back on how I had saved the child from drowning.  The realization that I was not completely dead to the world, that I could in fact have a very profound influence on the physical world beyond death was hard to imagine.  I began to think of all the lives I could save, not end.  I could provide what I had until now never received – hope.
The first task I set upon was trying to reach the people who had given me that hope, Anna and Leon.  I needed something from them still, or maybe it was the other way around.  Maybe I had something to give.  I could let Leon know somehow that a life of prayers and faith had not been in vain, maybe help Anna let go.  Maybe then I could leave it all behind.  And so I found myself, once again, within the reclusive walls of Anna’s house.  
She was sleeping, breathing softly against her covers, and seemed completely at peace.  Who could know what thoughts strayed into her subconscious dreaming mind, though?  I wondered if those dreams might concern me, then realized the thought was absurd, as was the idea that our brief affair could have meant so much as I had made it out to be.  But no, there had been something special there, something unsaid but ever present and undeniable.  I watched over her in absolute stillness, trying to figure out how to make my presence known without alarm.  As I reached down to nudge her from her slumber, that familiar and hated voice spoke out from behind with malicious intent.
“She’s beautiful.”
I didn’t bother to turn around, or even respond for that matter.
“I can see why you have a hard time letting go.  That soothing voice.  That sweet innocence.  Or is it ignorance?  He paused dramatically, then waved off the thought.  “It doesn’t matter I suppose.  It would be a shame to see that beauty waste away due to circumstances beyond that which she could comprehend,” he sighed, leaning over her.  He touched a finger to her neck and she shot upright, gasping for air and clawing at her slender throat.  Her eyes darted about, but could not find the source of distress.
“What are you doing?” I asked in desperation.
“You realize that your being here can only cause pain.  What you face is impossibility.”
“You’re wrong.”
“Am I?  You think you’ve figured it out, I know.  You move in silence, you interact with precision, you’ve even made your presence felt from across the breech.  But you will never fully comprehend the force at your fingertips, and you cannot deny the fact that I am in control.”
Anna was writhing in pain now.  “Please, stop!” I shouted, grabbing his arm.  He flung me aside effortlessly, glaring at me with an icy stare.  Voice raised, he shouted, “you stepped beyond your bounds!  I gave you every opportunity and you wanted more.”  Then softer, “now I hate doing this, I really do.  Shedding innocent before its time, it upsets the balance of things.  But I’ll do it if I have to, to make you learn.”  He then redoubled his efforts.
“Please, I’ll do anything!” I said.  He loosened up his grip.
“Anything?”
“You can send me to hell if it saves her life.”
The shadow chuckled.  “Hell?  Hell no.  I had something else in mind,” he stated, releasing his grip.  He leaned over to me and whispered “Mr. Kelly.”
I stepped back in shock.  “Leon?”
“That’s right, the good reverend.  He’s done more than enough in his time here, don’t you think?”  There was a hint of sarcasm and despise.
“I couldn’t…possibly.”
The shadow shook its head.  “Very well,” and he bent over Anna to finish her off.
“No wait!” I breathed in deeply and exhaled, then said, “I’ll do it.”



Standing at the base of the cold stone steps that led up to the open, foreboding doors of the church, it struck me as ironic that this was a place I had once sought refuge.  Above me in the angry sky a storm brewed, rumbling quietly yet with the ominous possibility of catastrophe that mimicked my own dilemma.  Somewhere within the church a large pipe organ droned to the wails of the church choir.  Two ushers emerged from within to shut the thick wooden doors, safeguarding against the impending storm.
Two lives, both responsible for the fleeting yet radiant moments I experienced in my final days, both for which I would gladly have put an end to my own existence if it meant preserving theirs.  Two lives hung in the balance and only one could survive.  This life that I had been promised would be unchanging and unending if I did not take a dramatic swing right now.  I stood at the threshold of no return…and slowly ascended.
I tried to block out the conflicting voices and images that waged war in my mind, for the first time uncertain as to whom was the master of my destiny.  Passing through the thick wooden doors, the sounds of the choir reached a crescendo as the outlying storm diminished.  I stood between the ranks of ushers that held themselves rigid and intent on the grandiose altar ahead, toward which a small procession was in progress.  I couldn’t help but notice the goosebumps that sprang to life on one usher’s skin upon my entrance.
I looked up at the immense statues of saints that towered above me, the murals and stained glass windows depicting heaven and earth and fire and brimstone.  I felt infinitely small all of the sudden, as if the eyes of all Heaven and Hell were upon me, sizing me up.  I stepped slowly forward, across blood red carpet among the rows of well-dressed and stolid churchgoers who followed along in their missals or fidgeted anxiously in their seats.
Ahead, preceded by the crucifix, two men covered the altar in an intricately sewn cloth as a large, leather-bound bible was placed on a golden stand amidst a multitude of flickering candles.  I paused in the middle of the congregation, sensing his presence before he passed through me, en route to the altar.  
I was mesmerized as I watched him stride forth confidently through the aisle, his robes sweeping the ground and billowing around him gracefully.  He looked at the people as he passed, smiling gently at each pair of eyes that met with his, even squeezing a few familiar hands.  He seemed so much at home among them.
Above, thunder cried out and the soft tapping of rain could be faintly heard on the high, arching roof as the music died and Leon took his place behind the altar.  He seemed unaware or unaffected by the storm.  As he looked down on the rows and rows of people that had packed into the old church to hear him speak, I approached.  I now stood within inches of his smiling eyes as lightning flashed outside and the wind began to whisper.  I could feel myself being torn apart from within.  My mind was dizzied.  The heavy burden of my decision felt crushing.  
Wind howled.  I struck.  Thunder boomed.
Reverend Kelly collapsed in a grimace of pain, falling to the floor as the church went dark.


At first it was all a blur.  I remember pouring myself into him with all my strength just as he opened his mouth to speak.  I think it was the shock of a sensation he could not possibly know that made him collapse.  From within his body I could hear the congregation gasp in surprise, just before the lights went out.  Through his eyes, all I could see was the dim, wavering light of the candles that surrounded the Holy Bible.  Within, all I could see at first was a tangled mesh of internal organs and fluid and vessels.  A rapidly beating heart sought to compensate for the strange intrusion, while adrenaline was released from the kidney and spread throughout his body, trying to help him summon all of his available strength to fight.
And fight he did.  Leon clung to life more strongly than anyone I had yet encountered.  His will to survive was so tenacious I began to wonder if I would simply perish inside him.  I fought back, trying to control his impulses and reactions.  It was a horrible, strange sensation, almost like being a puppeteer, except that instead of a few string to control I was faced with thousands, all tangled.  I could not merely kill him, whether I had the ability or not.  A man such as Leon does not deserve to die like that, to die like me.  I had to try and make him understand.  Still trapped within I finally found his brain, enigmatic and seemingly impregnable.  
“Leon,” I called out.  “It’s me, it’s Mike.  Mike Davis.  I was sent here to end your life.  Anna needs you.  God Leon, I’m so sorry.  They made me do it.  This is the hardest thing I’ve ever had to do, but it’s your time.  God wants you up in Heaven, I just know it.”  The tension in his body began to relax, and I dug deeper.  Somewhere within I made a connection.  I began to hurt like he hurt, think like he thought, and in doing so slipped the through the chains that bound me to this half-existence, at last allowed to roam completely free. 
Am I going to Heaven?
You did all that you could.
Was it enough?
I am free.
It’s so hard.
It will always be there.
Will I be alone?
Not a single step of the way.
And then it could be felt, at long last.  Complete and utter release.  Once again a soul rising from the body, but this time with direction and patience and calm.  In candlelight, churchgoers hovered over the body, sobbing and praying and staring into the heavens.  Leon…he just rose above it all.



You do not have to linger, a voice said, and so I clung tightly to the moral fibers of his soul, hoping to catch a glimpse of whatever he was destined for.  Together we began to rise, and as we did I felt the grasp of the shadow pulling me downward.  Leon bore my weight ungrudgingly, and strained to haul me free of death’s clutches.  The shadow pulled with renewed strength.  In the end the shadow was no match, and Leon and I rose above the congregation and continued until the steeple of the church was just a speck dotting the intricately mottled cityscape.  We rose above the storm, above the oppression and the everyday struggle.
Faster and faster we ascended until the clutches of gravity could not hold us, nor the confines of space itself.  My eyes were filled with searing light as we shot upward, and when we slowed my head was dizzied from the journey.  I shook away the cobwebs and tried to focus my sights on the new surroundings. 
It was nearly impossible.  
They progressed like picture stills, and I could barely comprehend what they were, much less than their significance.  I saw Leon standing there, naked before the brilliant light, his soul exposed.  In front of him was a mirror and across its glassy surface played what I assume were the events of his life.  A river permeated the light and in its waters Leon was purified.  Beside it grew a sturdy tree, from its branches grew true knowledge.  Set back from the tree, just off the water’s edge was a church just like the one in which Leon had preached.  Home.  The doors to the church opened and Leon stepped inside.  As I sought to enter, the doors slammed behind him quickly.  I could not follow.  Not yet.  Shut out from this paradise I began falling away from the church, off the face of a rocky cliff.  As I fell I saw Leon looking through the window with a great big smile on his face, and then he was gone. 



I don’t remember what happened afterwards.  In fact, I’m not quite sure what I saw there, salvation maybe.  I may never know.  But what I do know is that, up there so high and looking down, I think I caught a glimpse of innocence.  And then I knew I had another chance.
The next thing I knew I was back in that old dilapidated granary where this had all began, staring at my watch as Rogelio’s voice repeated over and over in the back of my mind.  “Man, what’s taking these cholos so long?  The shipment was supposed to be here by now.”
I looked at Rogelio and then back at my watch.  “I, uh…I’m just gonna go see if they are waiting outside.  I’ll be right back.”
I set my gun down, slid down the grain chute, and exited out the back of the granary where the truck sat idling.  I opened the door as quietly as possible and slid in, putting the truck into gear.  As I started to drive off down the dusty dirt farm road, I saw a squad car approaching and I pulled up beside it.  Inside was the night security guard, Mr. Cartwright.  It wasn’t too late.  I rolled down my window.
“Hey, I was just about to call you guys.  You better go check out that granary.  I saw a suspicious fella snoopin’ around the place earlier.  I think he had a gun.  I couldn’t see anybody inside, but I heard some noises.  I ain’t about to go inside though.”
“Thanks buddy,” Cartwright said.  “I’ll be careful.”
As the guard pulled up to the granary and got out of his car, I drove onward and never looked back, not even as I heard gunshots ring out from within the structure.


Epilogue

“Look at me,” I muttered to myself.  I was dressed in a suit and tie and I felt like one of those stiffs I had rebelled against my whole life.  “I never thought I’d be coming back here.”  I looked up at the massive prison walls encased in layers and layers of barbed wire and electric fencing.  Those walls still seemed menacing, even though I knew they could never again detain me.  Part of me wanted to turn around and run the other way, but I was driven by an agreement I had made in another life.  And here I was.  Somewhere within those walls was someone who needed my help, who needed a second chance like I did, who had never gotten their fair shot at living.
At the visiting office I was greeted by a large man with a gravelly voice.  “You must be Mr. Davis.  We’re glad to have your help.  You’ll be working with a kid named Kevin Colfari.  He’s doing five years of hard time for several counts.  Grand theft, possession with intent to-“  
“It doesn’t matter.”
“Yeah, well, anyway.  The important thing to know is that Kevin is a thickheaded kid.  He thinks he knows everything, including what’s best for him, and he doesn’t trust anybody but himself.  He might take some work.”
“I’ve got as long as it takes.”
I was escorted in and seated at the far end of a long folding table, staring across into the eyes of the troubled kid.  Kevin stared me down skeptically and silently with narrowed, mistrusting eyes.  We had been sitting in silence for some time, neither one of us about to break down and speak first.
Suddenly the doors to the interrogating room swung open and in walked Anna.  As she entered she was reading over some paperwork and saying, “Mr. Davis, this is the medication history that you-“ she looked up and our eyes locked in an inexplicable moment of passion.  “That you asked for…have we met?
I smiled knowingly.  “No Miss Lucero, I don’t believe we have.  But I’d love to get to know you.”
“How did you know my name?”
I wanted to tell her.  I wanted to pour out all the feelings I had felt for her and tell her all about the time we had shared but she would not possibly understand.  Instead I just pointed to her nametag.  She looked down and gave a red-faced smile.  “Oh, right.  Name tag.”  Visibly distracted, she somehow managed to focus back on the paperwork she had come to give me.  “Yeah, yeah, I’d like that,” she said with a tender smile.  She handed me the medication history and left the room, turning once more at the doorway to have a look at me.  
I turned back to the kid who still not saying a word, and drummed my fingers on the table idly.
At last he spoke. “Did anyone ever tell you that you like a bible salesman?”
“Not in so few words,” I said with a smile. 
“So that’s why you wanted to work in a dump like this,” referring to Anna.
“Nope.  I came because of a promise I made to an old friend, and because I’ve been where you are right now and I know there’s better things out there for guys like you and me.” 
“You did time?  Get outta here with your suit wearin’ ass!” he said in disbelief. 
“So what do you want with me?”
“I want to help you get out of here.”
“I’ve stayed alive this long.  I don’t need help from nobody.”
“Look, I know where you’re coming from.  I’ve been there.”
“You know nothin’ about what I been through!” he shouted.
“You know kid, a friend of mine once told me that to live is to suffer.  To survive, well, that’s to find meaning in the suffering.”
“Catharsis,” the kid said to my visible surprise.  “What you think just cuz I’m in jail means I got no education?”
“Kid, me and you are gonna get along just fine.”  I offered a hand and Kevin contemplated it.
“You get me out of here ahead of schedule?”
“I’ll help you get yourself out.”
Kevin reached out and grabbed my hand, shaking it vigorously.  “You got yourself a deal man.”
You know, you stop and think about it, at any single moment in time there’s a thousand different choices you could make.  And each one of them could change your life forever.  Makes you wonder who’s in control.  I still don’t know.  I guess all I really do know is that sometimes when you lose, you win.

THE END





